Gradua te Journal of C ouns eling Psycholog y
Volume 3 |Issue 1 Article 3
6-24-2012
Dream-W ork in P sychothe rapy: Jungian, Post-
Jungian, Existential-P henome nolog ical, and
Cognitive-E xperiential Appr oaches
William C aperton
Marquette University, william.caperton@m arquette.edu
Follow thi s and a dditional w orks at:http://e pub lications.marquette.edu/g jcp
Recomme nded Citation
Caperton, W illiam (2012) " Dream-W ork in P sychothe rapy: Jungian, Post-Jungian, E xistential-Phenome nological, and C ognit ive-
Experiential Appr oaches,"Graduate Journal of Co unseling Psychology: Vol. 3: I ss. 1, Ar ticle 3.
Available at:http://e pub lications.marquette.edu/g jcp/vol3/iss1/3

DREAM WORK IN PSYCHOTHERAPY   
 
 
Dream-Work in Psychotherapy: Jungian, Post-Jungian, Existential-
Phenomenological, and Cognitive-Experiential Approaches 
 
 “ Once Zhuangzi dreamt he was a butterfly, a butterfly flitting and fluttering 
around, happy with himself and doing as he pleased. He didn't know he was Zhuangzi. 
Suddenly he woke up and there he was, solid and unmistakable Zhuangzi. But he didn't 
know if he was Zhuangzi who had dreamt he was a butterfly, or a butterfly dreaming he 
was Zhuangzi. Between Zhuangzi and a butterfly there must be some distinction! This is 
called the Transformation of Things” ( tr.  Watson, B., 1968, p. 49). 
 
 “ A dream that is not understood remains a mere occurrence; understood, it 
becomes a living experience” - C.G. Jung, CW 16, para. 252 
 
 Dreaming has perplexed, fascinated, and mystified people throughout history, a nd 
dreams have been seen as ubiquitous and meaning-laden phenomenon in disparate 
cultures and times (see Cartwright, 1977; Dombeck, 1991). The quote above from 
Zhuangzi (4 th  century BCE) highlights some of the questions of the nature of 
consciousness, epistemology, and self-understanding that contemporary theorists a nd 
researchers continue to grapple with. The field of psychology and psychotherapy i n 
particular has been historically interested in the use of dreams for therapeuti c ends. Freud 
and Jung at the beginning of the last century considered dreams to carry significa nt 
weight in their approach to treating psychological problems. Since that time, a  number of 
theoreticians and practitioners have refined, refuted, combined, synthesized, ques tioned, 
and established their own approaches to dream work. While we may in some ways be 
living in a “society where dreams are of little or no social importance (in w hich we) have 
been devoted to a mastery over nature, including our own human nature” (Ullman, 1996, 
p.1), it remains true that clients in our therapeutic practices will bring dre ams into 
sessions. The ways in which practitioners approach this material will be infor med by their 
theoretical orientation as well as their level of training, interest in, and s ophistication with 
1Caperton: Dream-Work in Psychotherapy
Published by e-Publications@Marquette, 2012

DREAM WORK IN PSYCHOTHERAPY   
 
different dream work models. Thus, the focus of this literature review will be a s pecific 
look at a few of the theoretical models for working with dreams, as well as a revi ew of 
the empirical research that has investigated utility, efficacy, and outcome' s of specific 
dream work models. Due to the space constraints, this review will necessitate c ertain 
lacunae; in the interests of researching in depth specific theories, omissi ons of certain 
approaches or perspectives will be necessary. That said, a more thorough examina tion of 
Jungian and post-Jungian (Archetypal) approaches will largely displace a  focus on 
historic and contemporary psychoanalytic (Freudian) models. While certain 
neurobiological studies of the nature of dreaming will be included, these will al so not be 
exhaustive. Of specific interest to this current work will be Jungian, Post-Jung ian, 
Existential-Phenomenological, and Cognitive-Experiential approaches to worki ng with 
dreams within psychotherapy. We will seek to elucidate the theoretical unders tandings of 
these approaches, and examine the clinical use and efficacy of this type of w ork.  
Jungian Dream Work 
 Early psychoanalysts considered dreams to be powerful tools in the process of 
bringing unconscious desires and motivations into the light of day. Freud referred to 
dreams as the “via regia” to the unconscious and suggested that dreams primary f unction 
was the satisfaction of primitive and infantile wishes (Freud, 1900/1966). As an earl y 
acolyte to the practice of analysis being developed by Freud, Carl Jung also  saw dreams 
as a source of unconscious information. One of the key rifts which developed between 
the two theorists revolved around their conceptualizations of the nature of the 
unconscious and the function of dreams. Jung saw dreams as providing access to the 
various layers of the unconscious and through this access a means for ascertaining  
2Graduate Journal of Counseling Psychology, Vol. 3, Iss. 1 [2012], Art. 3
http://epublications.marquette.edu/gjcp/vol3/iss1/3

DREAM WORK IN PSYCHOTHERAPY   
 
potential messages for psychic equilibrium and healing. Jung conceptualized the eti ology 
of non-organic / biological neurosis and psychosis as developing from an unbalanced 
reliance on one portion of the personality, in which splitting and projection of 
unrecognized portions of the total personality occur. One of the fundamental splits i s that 
between unconscious and conscious understanding, and thus one of the aims of 
psychotherapy was to bring conscious awareness to these unconscious psychic contents .  
While Freud thought of unconscious contents as having once been conscious and 
subsequently repressed, Jung conceived of unconscious contents as having a tripartit e 
origin. Unconscious contents could have been once conscious and forgotten but 
additionally contain “all those psychic components that have fallen below the threshol d, 
including sense perceptions” (Jung, Collected Works, 7, para. 204, hereinafter referred to 
as CW) . The third sources of unconscious material in Jung’s conceptualization are 
archetypal contents. Through cross-cultural mythological and religious emp irical study, 
Jung came to believe that “inherited human mental experiences created a colle ctive 
unconscious, comprised of universal, culturally transcendent symbols seen in fairy t ales, 
myths, esoteric practices, and dreams” (Eudell-Simmons, E., & Hilsenroth, M, 200 7, p. 
333). The collective unconscious is comprised of archetypes, which are not specific 
images or motifs, but rather typical propensities for representation. An arche type is “not 
an idea which has been acquired by humanity” (Mattoon, M., 1978, p. 19), but rather a 
“possibility of representation” (Jung, CW9-I, par 155). Jung likened the archetype to the  
concept of instincts, stating that archetypes are “typical modes of apprehension”  (CW8, 
par. 280) while instincts are “typical modes of action” (CW8, par. 273).  
3Caperton: Dream-Work in Psychotherapy
Published by e-Publications@Marquette, 2012

DREAM WORK IN PSYCHOTHERAPY   
 
 Jung thought of dreams as serving a compensatory function toward the dominant 
conscious attitude (Jung, 1974). Jung differed with Freud on the notion that a dream 
presents manifest content which occludes an underlying latency in which the actual  
“meaning” resides. This is not to say that dream images are simply non-symboli c 
phenomenon presenting a picture “as is” with no need for further elucidation. Jung stat es 
that “dreams do not deceive, the do not lie, they do not distort or disguise, but naively 
announce what they mean...they are invariably seeking to express something that the ego 
does not know and does not understand” (Jung, 1946, para. 189). A subsequent Jungian 
oriented clinician has described the “superordinate function of dreams (to be) the 
development, maintenance (regulation), and, when necessary, restoration of psychic 
processes, structures, and organizations” (Foshage, J. as quoted in Whitmont, E., & 
Perera, S., 1989, p. 2). This theory posits the dream as a representation of the current 
psychic situation of the dreamer, pointing out the manner in which the personality is 
functioning as well as suggesting potential amendments or adjustments to this  attitude. In 
the conscious apprehension and working through of personal subjective, objective, and 
archetypal associations, dream images have the potential to unfold a deeper psy chological 
understanding of ones current situatedness and patterns of behavior. John Beebe 
summarizes the assumption which overlays and informs all of the unique contributions of 
Jungian dream work as the foundational idea that “the unconscious exists to enlarge 
consciousness, and...it does its work by means of symbolic suggestion” (Beebe, J., 1993., 
p. 81).  
 The manner in which Jungian therapists work with dream images has been 
characterized as a circumambulation. Jung was critical of the method of free- association 
4Graduate Journal of Counseling Psychology, Vol. 3, Iss. 1 [2012], Art. 3
http://epublications.marquette.edu/gjcp/vol3/iss1/3

DREAM WORK IN PSYCHOTHERAPY   
 
developed by Freud in that he believed it led away from the primacy of the informat ion 
contained in the manifest content of the images. In Freud's method of associati on, images 
yielded personal associations, which in turn yielded further associations to thos e 
associations. Jung found that this process led invariably to an identification of a dream 's 
complexes, but not in a way unique to the dream. That is, any image or thought could 
lead through a similar associative chain to a core complex. Mary Ann Mattoon sta tes 
several problems with this method as read through Jung. She positions the most important  
of these problems in the fact that “free association does not reveal what the dr eam says 
about the complex(es) to which it leads, and the dream message may be lost completel y 
(Mattoon, M., 1978, p. 55). Rather, in the Jungian method association and elaboration is 
employed in the interest of filling out the nature and character of the images  in the dream, 
as they are presented, until their meaning begins to become clearer. Mattoon dra ws a nice 
image differentiating these approaches, stating that “free associati on leads by “zig zag” 
lines away from the dream image; circumambulation makes possible looking at the  image 
from all sides, and describes a metaphorical circle, the content of which suggest s the 
meaning of that image” (Mattoon, M., 1978 p. 56).  
 Several steps can be discerned in the classical approach to Jungian dream 
analysis. Mattoon, in her synthesis of Jung's writings on dream theory has elaborat ed the 
following general framework. The first step is stating the dream text in t erms of structure, 
generally including exposition (who is there, where we are, what time it is) , development 
of the plot (what begins to happen), and peripetia or culmination in which something 
happens decisively or a change of some kind occurs. The next stage involves establishing  
the context of the dream. This would include associations, explanations, and 
5Caperton: Dream-Work in Psychotherapy
Published by e-Publications@Marquette, 2012

DREAM WORK IN PSYCHOTHERAPY   
 
amplifications of the dream images, including the personal, cultural, and archetypal  (i.e. 
mythical, religious, literary) levels. The context also includes illuminat ing any themes 
which tie the amplifications together, the current and long-term conscious sit uation of the 
dreamer, and whether or not the dream is a part of a series. Stemming from these  
observations, the interpreter reminds themselves of the “appropriate attitude ” to bring to 
an interpretation. This includes the notions that nothing can be assumed about the 
meaning of the dream or images, that the dream does not disguise but presents a set  of 
“psychic facts”, and that the dream likely is not an instruction to the dreamer. The  
interpreter should also maintain awareness of the personality character istics of the 
dreamer and themselves. The following step is to characterize the images as  either 
objective or subjective, or indeed at many times both. One way to conceptualize thi s is to 
consider; if people populate the dream image, whether the people are actual 
acquaintances of the dreamer, or if they represent splinters or projected as pects of the 
dreamers’ personality.  At times, both an objective and subjective approach to imag es 
may reveal deeper levels of meaning. The next stage is to consider what com pensatory 
meaning or message the dream may be revealing. This is achieved throug h considering 
the problem or complex the dream seems to point to, what the conscious situation the 
dreamer is faced with, and whether the dream seems to require a reductive or cons tructive 
characterization (Mattoon, M., 1978,  Hall, J., 1983). 
 Whitmont and Perera (1989) make a modification to the notion that dreams 
always  present a compensatory view to the dominant egoic standpoint. They note that 
often clients in therapy have no clearly elaborated, static sense of self i n which a strong 
ego is operational. They suggest that in addition to compensation, dream images may 
6Graduate Journal of Counseling Psychology, Vol. 3, Iss. 1 [2012], Art. 3
http://epublications.marquette.edu/gjcp/vol3/iss1/3

DREAM WORK IN PSYCHOTHERAPY   
 
complete a situation through complementation. Complementation and compensation are 
considered overlapping concepts, both of which serve to balance a one-sided conscious 
position. A compensatory image works to do this by presenting a polar opposite version 
of the conscious standpoint. They suggest that this opposition may serve to point out the 
negative aspects of an idealized waking conscious viewpoint, for example. 
Complementation on the other hand, does not present polar opposites, but rather adds 
missing elements to a conscious viewpoint. Whitmont and Perera also report occurr ences 
of dreams that complement a tentatively held conscious position, in a manner which 
serves to reinforce this attitude.  
 Compensation and a consciousness of the precursor to the compensatory impulse 
have many potentially therapeutic effects. Jung suggested that an ongoing ex perience and 
encounter with compensatory unconscious material could have a cumulative effect of  
bringing a new waking attitude and a “new level of consciousness” (CW11, para. 779). 
Mattoon (1978) describes some of the salutary potentials of compensation including a 
coming to understand the basis for emotions, changes in attitude, and accepting the 
“other” in oneself (p. 131-132).  
 James Hall (1983) points to two ongoing tensions in dream work within a Jungian 
frame. He suggests that the first is the tension between objective and subjective  
interpretation of dream images or motifs. An objective interpretation is one in which t he 
dream image is considered a representation or referent of a person, thing, event, et c. 
occurring in the dreamer's waking life. A subjective interpretation is one in which t he 
image is considered a representation of a portion of the dreamer's own psyche or s elf. 
Mattoon (1978) suggests the method for determining a subjective versus objective 
7Caperton: Dream-Work in Psychotherapy
Published by e-Publications@Marquette, 2012

DREAM WORK IN PSYCHOTHERAPY   
 
interpretation lies in the closeness of the dreamed character to the dreamer . She states that 
images of persons close to or important to the dreamer in waking life such as par ents, 
siblings, close friends, or lovers, an objective interpretation is likely indicate d. For 
persons unknown or who are remote or not significant to the dreamer in waking life, 
Mattoon suggests a subjective interpretation is likely more applicable. Whitmont a nd 
Perera suggest that the decision to interpret on an objective or subjective level ca n be 
decided by determining which avenue will “most likely fulfill a compensatory o r 
complementary function” (1989, p. 79) or provide information or insight previously 
unavailable to the conscious standpoint. In dealing with clients with fragile or 
undeveloped ego's, Whitmont and Perera stress the importance of avoiding interpretat ions 
that challenge the fragmented ego position. They suggest that clients with inade quate ego 
development may not be able to tolerate integrating negative projections presente d by 
dream images as their self-image is already overly negative (1989, p. 64). These  authors 
illustrate the fact that there can be multiple subjective levels in a given dr eam image, 
including the emotions induced in the dreamer by  a dream character or situation, and the 
emotion ascribed to those same characters or situations. They suggest that in working 
with clients with fragile egos, the primary focus should remain on the emotions fel t by 
the dream ego in relation to the dream situation, until “there is a minimal capac ity for 
integrating psychological contents that are foreign and negative to the self- image and ego 
ideal” (Whitmont, E., & Perera, S., 1989, p. 64).  
 The second ongoing tension in Jungian oriented dream work suggested by Hall 
(1983) is that between personal and archetypal meaning of dream images and situations . 
Hall suggests that for a person overly identified with the collective culture ( “collective 
8Graduate Journal of Counseling Psychology, Vol. 3, Iss. 1 [2012], Art. 3
http://epublications.marquette.edu/gjcp/vol3/iss1/3

DREAM WORK IN PSYCHOTHERAPY   
 
consciousness”), realization and integration of archetypal contents can be fre eing. 
However, he noted that for persons in which a schizophrenic (non-diagnostically), 
fragmented experience of reality dominates and in which archetypal imag es appear as 
assaultive, the experience of a stable ego standpoint can be felt as “liberation”  (1983, p. 
114).  Mattoon suggests that archetypal interpretations should not be attempted until all  
of the dreamers personal and cultural associative and amplificatory materi al have been 
exhausted. She describes two ways in which archetypal dreams can have therapeut ic 
value. In the first instance, analysis of these dreams can help the dreamer to f eel less 
isolated, in being confronted with the realization that other human's have simila r 
problems and that “every subjective difficulty has to be viewed from the standpoint of  the 
general human situation (CW 10, par. 323 as quoted in Mattoon, 1978, p. 70). The second 
therapeutic value stems from the dreamer experiencing an opening to increase d horizons 
for personal wholeness, through coming into contact with transpersonal contents. 
(Mattoon, 1978). Whitmont and Perera (1988) note the importance of grounding 
archetypal dreams and their associations and insights with more personal materi al. They 
stress that when working with archetypal material, a negative outcome can b e the 
dreamer becoming lost in “sermonizing about abstract philosophical or religious 
principles” (p. 90). They point out the necessity of connecting the archetypal theme s from 
so-called “big” dreams with the personal concerns and situation of the dreamer, by 
pulling out the particular actions, behaviors, and emotions within the dreamer’s act ual 
world that are reflected or connected to the archetypal or mythological am plifications. 
One of the ways in which they suggest this can be accomplished is through comparing 
themes from “little” personal dreams with the themes of “big”, archetypal dr eams. These 
9Caperton: Dream-Work in Psychotherapy
Published by e-Publications@Marquette, 2012

DREAM WORK IN PSYCHOTHERAPY   
 
authors suggest avoiding exploring archetypal and mythological amplifications i n ways 
that detract from the here/now dynamics of the analysand’s experience, and not e that 
these excursions can detract from a working through of personal material nec essary for 
ego building and resolving unconscious complexes. On the other hand, they highlight the 
usefulness of connecting a client to transpersonal themes evident in their mat erial 
especially when faced with existential, “insoluble life problems” (Whitm ont, E., & 
Perera, S., 1988, p. 109). They suggest that in these instances archetypal parallels ca n 
serve to relate personal, egoic discomfort with its spiritual, collective m atrix.  
 A question which arises here, or around any body of interpretive theory is how to 
assess a given interpretation's validity. This is certainly true for dre am interpretation, and 
a number of strategies have been established within the Jungian framework. At the s ame 
time, a recognition is made that symbolic material as depicted through dreams  is by its 
nature manifold in its potential for disclosure. Richard Kradin remarks that “as sy mbols 
in dreams potentially convey inexhaustible meaning, no single dream interpre tation can 
ever be 'correct'”(Kradin, R., 2006, p. 36). He instead advocates, as do a number of other 
Jungian writers, a perspective that acknowledges a dream image may reveal  multiple 
levels of depth and interpretive material over time. Kradin goes on to suggest t hat one of 
the best indicators of an interpretation's “correctness” is if it has an impac t on the dreamer 
which includes an element of surprise. This is congruent with Jung's theory that 
unconscious factors as depicted in dreams often serve a compensatory function. Mattoon 
describes a four-factor model for verifying a dream interpretation, in desc ending order of 
applicability. Step one echoes Kradin and Jung's (1974) suggestion that above all the 
interpretation should “click” for the dreamer. The second factor is assessin g whether or 
10Graduate Journal of Counseling Psychology, Vol. 3, Iss. 1 [2012], Art. 3
http://epublications.marquette.edu/gjcp/vol3/iss1/3

DREAM WORK IN PSYCHOTHERAPY   
 
not the interpretation “acts” for the dreamer; this acting may show itself mo st readily in 
the analytic session as an experience of increased “flow” between the cl ient and analyst. 
In contrast, Jung expressed the notion that errors in dream interpretation may res ult in 
“bleakness, sterility, and pointlessness”(CW7, para. 189) during sessions. The thir d factor 
is assessed through the analysis of subsequent dreams. Mattoon, following Jung, sugges ts 
that if a dream has been incorrectly or inadequately interpreted, the dream er may bring in 
additional dreams which repeat the major motif's of the misinterpreted dream . The final 
test for validity according to Mattoon is assessing whether the “events” anti cipated by the 
interpretation come to pass in the dreamer's life.  
 The Jungian analyst Margaret Wilkinson has brought insights from contemporary 
neuroscience to bear in her examination of Jungian oriented dream-work. She contends 
that this research supports Jung's assertion that dreams reveal rather than conc eal the 
central emotional concerns of the dreamer. Wilkinson reports that in REM sleep (the  
period of sleep most associated with dreaming (Solms & Turnbull, 2002) the lymbic 
system is activated while the executive areas of the brain are deactivat ed.  This activation 
of the centers of the brain (especially the amygdala) crucial for emotional  processing and 
regulation points to the importance of REM sleep and dreaming in processing emotion. 
She notes the congruency of this view with Jung's contention that emotion is the “prime 
mover in dream plots” (Wilkinson, 2006, p. 47). Wilkinson cites these recent 
neuroimaging studies evidencing the primacy of emotion in dreaming as confirm atory to 
the Jungian practice of focusing on the “mood and affect that underpin the dream, and the 
relation to the dreamers waking emotional life” (2006, p. 47). Wilkinson marshals 
evidence from Hobson and Pace-Schott, who have determined that dreaming 
11Caperton: Dream-Work in Psychotherapy
Published by e-Publications@Marquette, 2012

DREAM WORK IN PSYCHOTHERAPY   
 
consciousness is differentiated from waking consciousness in that the executive  
organizing functions of the brain are inhibited during REM sleep, in disconfirming 
Freud's notion that dreams are censored and disguised (2006, p. 50). She proposes a 
neurologically informed view of the as yet hypothetical goal implicit to J ungian dream 
work of strengthening the Ego/Self or Conscious/Unconscious axis. Wilkinson sta tes “in 
working with dreams...the individual develops a creative capacity to make conceptua l and 
affective links across different realms of knowing; material may begin to m ove from 
unconscious implicit memory towards the explicit realm of knowledge and memory 
where it may be thought about” (2006, p. 53). In making this connection Wilkinson 
seems to be stating that dream images are connected with underlying, impli cit emotions 
which through their vivid presentation begin to emerge for the dreamer, who, through 
working the material is able to bring the unconscious / implicit into a conscious / e xplicit 
sphere, an inherently creative act which may serve to resolve the underlying e motional 
complex. Hobson's research supports the Jungian notion that dreams present an 
undisguised emotional concern for the dreamer, stating that “dream content is 
emotionally salient on its face, and the close attention of dreamers and their ther apists is 
all that is needed to see the feelings they represent” (2004, p. 89).   Cambray and Cart er 
stress the transferential importance of dream work as presenting a psychi c state at a 
particular moment in which it is “critical for therapeutic value...that the dream er 
discovers/recovers in the analytic process the affective experience resi ding in the dream” 
(Cambray, J., & Carter, L., 2004, p 131). Dyane Sherwood responds to the importance 
raised by Wilkinson's work of the affective content of dreams and the affective  
interchange between analyst and client. She summarizes this importance as presenting the 
12Graduate Journal of Counseling Psychology, Vol. 3, Iss. 1 [2012], Art. 3
http://epublications.marquette.edu/gjcp/vol3/iss1/3

DREAM WORK IN PSYCHOTHERAPY   
 
“way an empathic resonance between the analytic pair fosters symbol forma tion and, 
with it, the anticipation of a more passionate engagement with life” (Sherwood, 2006, p. 
61).  
 Wyatt, Goodwyn, and Ignatowski present a series of case-examples of the 
beneficial effects of working with dreams reported by soldiers in modern comba t zones. 
The authors took a Jungian-informed approach to working with dreams, and their 
interpretive methods emphasized the symbolic nature of the material presente d by the 
soldiers. They conclude that working with the dreams of soldiers in active combat c an 
serve to help “otherwise psychologically un-insightful patients” gain insight i nto the 
emotional factors related to their dreams, and may help the soldiers begin to fee l less 
threatened by the sometimes disturbing images and ideas contained in these drea ms 
(Wyatt, R., Goodwyn, E., & Ignatowski, M., 2011). There is further empirical support for 
the attainment of insight in working with dream material, to be discussed later i n this 
paper.  
Archetypal Dream Work 
 James Hillman presents a somewhat darker re-visioning of the nature of dream ing 
and it's applicability to psychotherapy. Trained as a Jungian analyst in Zuric h, Hillman 
was the director of studies at the Jung Institute for ten years before developi ng what has 
become a post-Jungian psychology referred to as Archetypal Psychology. A bri ef 
synopsis of this differentiation may facilitate an understanding of the Archet ypal 
approach to dreams. While analytical (Jungian) psychology is concerned with t he 
manifestations of the Self and the path of individuation, Archetypal psychology is 
focused centrally on psyche, or soul (Hillman, 1983). Archetypal psychology is rooted in 
13Caperton: Dream-Work in Psychotherapy
Published by e-Publications@Marquette, 2012

DREAM WORK IN PSYCHOTHERAPY   
 
the Jungian idea that the psyche is purposeful, but rather than enunciate this 
purposefulness, this approach seeks to “foster the sense of purpose as therapeutic in i tself 
because it enhances the patient's interest in psychic phenomena...as intentional”  (Hillman, 
1983, p. 43). The poetic basis of mind, the notion of “soul” as imaginative possibility 
engendered by this approach, seeks to explore images (fantasies, dreams, etc)  rather than 
explain them. A looking at and elaborating in detail the nature of the images produced in 
fantasy, dream, and pathology, produces meaning endogenously. Rather than accepting 
the notion of a centrally located, organizing Self, Hillman stresses the poly-ce ntric and 
mutating nature of our being, and the manner in which we become caught in narrative 
“images”. He states that “an essential work of therapy is to become consci ous of the 
fictions in which the patient is cast and to re-write...collaboratively, the story  by re-telling 
it in a more profound and authentic style” (Hillman, 1983, p. 45). Along those lines, 
Hillman takes a drastically different view on pathology, seeing in pathologi cal conditions 
diminished versions of situations and modes-of-being exemplified in myths, or 
archetypes (hence the name). He notes that Archetypal psychology views pat hological 
conditions as the prime conditions thru which “the gods” enter the human, in as much as 
symptoms provide “the most palpable manner of bearing witness to the powers beyond 
ego control and the insufficiency of the ego perspective” (Hillman, 1983, p. 39). “Gods” 
in this sense stand as a metaphor for the various ego dystonic behaviors, fantasies, dr eam 
images, etc that buffet therapeutic clients relentlessly. Pathology, when experienced and 
examined imaginatively, begins to be seen as a foundational and necessary aspe ct of the 
person affected. This work is based in an understanding that images (fantasies, dream s, 
etc) are the foundation of depth psychology, that our psychology is essentially imag ined 
14Graduate Journal of Counseling Psychology, Vol. 3, Iss. 1 [2012], Art. 3
http://epublications.marquette.edu/gjcp/vol3/iss1/3

DREAM WORK IN PSYCHOTHERAPY   
 
and imaged. The focus of Archetypal psychology then becomes a refinement of 
imaginative capacity, and “the aim of working with dreams or life events as  dreams is to 
bring reflection to declarative and unreflected discourse...so that...speech becomes  
imagistic, self-referent, descriptive of a psychic condition as its very e xpression” (Berry, 
1982, as quoted in Hillman, 1983, p. 46).  
 Dream work is central to the practice of Archetypal psychology in as much as  
dreams are one of the primary sources of seemingly autonomous and emergent image s. 
Hillman disagrees with the more classical Jungian notion of dreams as presenti ng a 
compensation, stating that dreams tell us where we are, not what to do (Hillman, 1979). 
Hillman's approach to dream work is less analytic and interpretive and more 
phenomenologically descriptive, congruent with the assumption that the development of 
refined imagination is consistent with the “soul-making” aims of the psyche. He 
elucidates this approach in stating “for me therapy is basically the evocat ion of 
imagination: it's training, working, struggling with imagination. If I  were to say what it 
has to do with healing, I'd have to say healing the imagination or healing the relat ionship 
to the imagination” (Hillman, 1998, p. 48). Claiming at times to be a-theoretical, Hill man 
notes that a Freudian, Jungian or other any other theory can utilize his overarching  
approach of sticking to the images specificity, as the metapsychological s tories that 
explain dreams are irrelevant to the method of investigating the images in det ail 
(Hillman, 1979). However, at other times he makes statements the would seem to 
preclude some of the assumptions of alternative dream theories especially in t heir 
reliance on taking a dream as a communication about the waking life situation of the 
individual, or as potential messages relating to avenues for development (see clas sical 
15Caperton: Dream-Work in Psychotherapy
Published by e-Publications@Marquette, 2012

DREAM WORK IN PSYCHOTHERAPY   
 
Jungian approach above, as well as the existential/phenomenological and cognitive-
experiential approaches to follow). Rather, Hillman wishes to emphasize the 
“disintegrative effects” of the dream, which “confront us with our lack of a centra l hold 
on ourselves. Dreams show us to be plural and that each of the forms that figure there  are 
the 'full man himself', full potentials of behavior” (Hillman, 1979, p. 41). Consistent with 
the polytheistic and multiple view of the self within the Archetypal approach, Hi llman 
contends that the value in encountering these images inheres in our ability to extend 
consciousness or our sense of personal identity to contain these potentials.  Hillm an 
contends that the archetypal is brought to the foreground even through seemingly 
objective dream characters. In an example of encountering a friend in a dream , Hillman 
expands the objective, subjective, and archetypal view of this projected image. While t he 
dreamer may describe the actual friend (objective level) and the emotions or pot entials 
this type of person holds for the dreamer (subjective level), there is also  
an archetypal sense that now begins to emerge from “She-who-is-passive,” “He-
who-is-poisonous,” and from the “Other-who-wonderfully-listens.” In the one 
figuration of my friend are my subjective personal traits and potentials and the 
archetypal personae who are the deeper potentials within each of our 
subjectivities ( Hillman, 1979, p. 100).  
 
The central focus for Hillmans approach to dreams seems to be sticking to the image , 
describing it in its fullness, encountering it as autonomous and non-egoic, deepening  our 
capacity to hear and explore psychological experience; keeping the dream i tself alive. 
This work is a conservation which implies “holding on to what is, and even assuming that 
what is is right” (Hillman, 1979, p. 116). This conservation and encounter with the 
images of the psyche on their own terms is a goal in and of itself for the archety palists.  
16Graduate Journal of Counseling Psychology, Vol. 3, Iss. 1 [2012], Art. 3
http://epublications.marquette.edu/gjcp/vol3/iss1/3

DREAM WORK IN PSYCHOTHERAPY   
 
 Hillman counters the notion of dreams as compensation with his idea that dreams 
are an initiation. In elaborating his underworld metaphor, Hillman suggests that dreams 
are not intended to complete ego consciousness, but to temper it, qualify it, and in his 
more bombastic enunciations, to erase it (Hillman, 1979). He asserts that dream im ages 
serve to highlight the mythological dimension in which we are situated, and devalue 
almost completely our usual, logos-centered mentality. He also rejects the Jungian notion 
of wholeness, progress, and individuation, stating “this model fundamentally devalues the  
existential importance of depression and the descent into dissolution per se” (Hillman, as 
quoted in Shelburne, 1984, p. 44). Hillman seems to suggest that wholeness, for instance, 
is but one of a set of applicable fantasies and psychological experiences. Simila rly, 
Hillman rejects the traditional Jungian approach to verifying an interpretat ion, in which 
the dreamers surprised, automatic assent or resonance with the interpretati on serves as 
verification. According to Hillman, this approach to verification shows that the 
interpretation agrees with the values of the ego, which in his view the dream seeks  to 
supplant (Shelburne, 1984). He also rejects the method of objective interpretation of, for 
example, known figures within dreams. According to Hillmans psychology, these dr eam 
characters cannot be taken as representatives of persons from real waking l ife, but rather 
refer to archetypal persons (Hillman, 1979). Thus, my father dressed in a black suit  may 
become The Father Who Wears Black, a figure of applicability well beyond my pe rsonal, 
biological father.  
 Shelburne presents a number of critiques to Hillman’s views on dreams. One of 
the major limitations disclosed by Shelburne resides in Hillman's total re jection of 
attending to logos in relation to dreams. He highlights this point noting that, if we accept 
17Caperton: Dream-Work in Psychotherapy
Published by e-Publications@Marquette, 2012

DREAM WORK IN PSYCHOTHERAPY   
 
this view “all future empirical discoveries about dreams and sleep must be conside red 
irrelevant to our dream theory...the consequence of following through on such a view 
would mean that almost any imaginative construction could be put forth as archetypa l” 
(Shelburne, 1984, p. 52). Additionally, Shelburne argues that Hillman's rejection of all 
egoic concerns goes too far, and states that the ego does have a special role to play within 
the psyche. He argues that the ego function has come to be through a process of evolution 
which has enabled us to live successfully in the actual  world (Shelburne, 1984). 
Shelburne additionally argues that Hillman's disavowal of the traditional Jung ian means 
of interpretive verification misses the mark, arguing that a successful int erpretation does 
not simply reinforce the egoic point of view but challenges and brings something new 
into ego consciousness.  
 Knudson, Adame, and Finocan take up Hillman's archetypal account of dreams as 
a context into which we enter and are embraced in their exploration of the possibilit y of 
repositioning self-narratives in so-called “significant dreams”, whic h are analogous to 
those dreams referred to by Jung and classically trained Jungian analysts a s “Big 
Dreams”. These authors propose that significant dreams, or dreams which ar e highly 
charged, remembered, and subjectively retro-actively felt to carry  “significance”, can 
“motivate or animate personal repositioning” (Knudson, R., Adame, A., & Finocan, G., 
2006, p. 221). They utilize concepts of discursive self-positioning against master 
narratives taken from deconstructive theory and narrative psychology to exempl ify the 
manner in which significant dreams can impel this repositioning. In this article , the 
authors stress the importance of sticking to the images and feeling how one becomes 
moved by and taken up by the images, which Hillman suggests is the nature underlying 
18Graduate Journal of Counseling Psychology, Vol. 3, Iss. 1 [2012], Art. 3
http://epublications.marquette.edu/gjcp/vol3/iss1/3

DREAM WORK IN PSYCHOTHERAPY   
 
dreams. In other words, these authors present a usefulness of the mythologizing proces s 
explicated by Hillman for disclosing narratives, and “seeing through” the ir seeming 
literal reality into a new personal horizon, what Hillman calls “deliteral izing”. In another 
article discussing the ongoing significance of “significant dreams”, Knudson a gain 
accords with Hillman, stating “perhaps the significance of the significant  dream lies 
precisely in the fact that the dream images do not become pinned down by any particula r 
interpretation, are never literalized into any single fixed concept or "m eaning. Instead the 
dreamer returns or is drawn again and again to an experiential "living in the im age," with 
new meanings potentially emerging over time as one goes, in Hillman’s w ords, 'more 
deeply into the image'” (Knudson, 2003, p. 13).  Knudson argues for the primary 
importance of the act of imagining, over and above interpreting, in working with drea ms. 
He suggests that images, including dream images, are not re presentations of objects that 
require interpretation, but are rather pre sentations, “acts that transform reality, freeing the 
imaginer from the constraints of both past and present” (Knudson, 2003, p. 15), a 
corrective concern with re-presentation that will reappear in phenomenology. He accords 
with Hillman in not reducing images from dreams, especially “significant” dr eams into 
reified, singular interpretations. Knudson, following Hillman, returns to the idea s of 
Gaston Bachelard, who suggests that images, as they are ever changing and  hard-to-pin-
down, are things “of beauty and self-fulfillment, not usefulness...they release t he 
imagination from the confines of personal and interpersonal life”(Knudson,2003, p. 16). 
It is through encountering and paying respect to the autonomy and mutability of im ages 
that arise through fantasy and dream that, Knudson and Hillman suggest, psychotherapy  
may best offer its original etymological sense; care of soul.  
19Caperton: Dream-Work in Psychotherapy
Published by e-Publications@Marquette, 2012

DREAM WORK IN PSYCHOTHERAPY   
 
Existential-Phenomenological Approaches 
 The existentialist-phenomenological approach to working with dreams suggests  a 
more radical move away from underlying metapsychological assumptions, focusing  on 
the manifest content of dreams, returning again and again to the “things as they  are”. This 
model suggests that rather than conceiving of dreams as emanating from a hypothe sized 
“unconscious” or other fundamentally internal or external “other”, dreams should be  seen 
from a phenomenological perspective as presenting further modes of being-in -the-world. 
In relation to dreams, Medard Boss presented the first articulation of this appr oach, and 
he emphasizes that dreams are “not something we have, they are an aspect of our be ing – 
we are our dreaming state” (Boss as quoted in Langdridge, 2006, p. 5). Boss recogniz ed 
that a dreamer is confronted with a particular way of being through the experie nce and 
images of a dream, and made a phenomenological description of this content the primary  
mode of his analysis. Another way of stating this is that Boss and other existenti al-
phenomenological oriented analysts suggest that a dream discloses a dreamer 's current 
concerns (Langdridge, 2006). Boss understood dreams as one of the many “givens” of 
human existence, and as such, suggested that the only way to appreciate the meaning  
inhering in this given was by sticking to the images and experiences within the 
experience of dreaming itself. This was a radical departure from the preva iling 
psychoanalytic tradition which sought in dreams confirmation of pre-established 
theoretical constructs; whether they be reductive (Freudian) or synthetic  (Jungian). Boss 
suggested that we could be freed from these theoretical “acrobatics” by res ponding to two 
questions, whether awake or dreaming. Those were; “1. For what givens is a person's  
existence at a certain time open enough to be able to grant them entrance int o the 
20Graduate Journal of Counseling Psychology, Vol. 3, Iss. 1 [2012], Art. 3
http://epublications.marquette.edu/gjcp/vol3/iss1/3

DREAM WORK IN PSYCHOTHERAPY   
 
understanding openness of his world-domain by virtue of his being able to be addressed 
and his being able to be alert? 2. In what special way is he, as alert and answerin g, 
bonded with what he encounters?” (Boss, in Scott, C. (ed), 1977, p. 10). That is, what are 
the phenomenon that a person is open  to understanding, and how does this understanding 
evolve within a rigorous encounter or focusing to disclose as yet concealed or 
unrecognized possibilities. Dreaming, according to Craig & Walsh (1993) pres ents us 
with three sorts of existential possibilities. They suggest that in dreams, we  are concerned 
with “those possibilities of our lives that we openly acknowledge on a daily basis whi le 
fully awake; those possibilities that we acknowledge in our waking life but w hich...we 
choose to ignore; (and those) possibilities that help constitute our waking experie nce but 
that...we do not recognize at all” (Craig, E. & Walsh, S., 1993, p. 108). Rather than 
focusing on constructs like underlying personality characteristics, interp ersonal patterns, 
or unconscious conflicts that contributed to the dream material, the existential -
phenomenological practitioner considers the explication of the dream and the here-and -
now experience of the dream narrative to be the salient clinical material (E udell Simmons 
& Hilsenroth, 2007). Through investigating the specific images and characters  in the 
dream as they reveal themselves to the dreamer, an unfolding of wider horizons or 
possibilities for action and/or meaning may occur. Boss emphasizes the importa nce of not 
interpreting or transforming the images to meanings outside of their actuali ty, but in 
lifting out what is already in the image, ontically and ontologically. The ont ic layer of a 
dream image refers to the immediately understood, everyday meaning of a pa rticular 
being or image. The ontologic layer of meaning refers to the reflected upon, formal  
structure of beings, the things which define a set of beings as beings. As exam ples of this 
21Caperton: Dream-Work in Psychotherapy
Published by e-Publications@Marquette, 2012

DREAM WORK IN PSYCHOTHERAPY   
 
differentiation, a client may be asked to consider not just this particular ca t, but cat- ness 
as such; not just this particular tree, but tree- ness  as such. These layers reveal themselves 
only through the client’s elucidation of the specificity of the phenomenon, in which it is  
imperative that the analyst seeks to bracket their presuppositions about given im ages. 
What is important is not the therapists understanding of symbols and their translati ons, 
but the clients coming into a fuller awareness of the depth inhering to a dream imag e and 
its connection to their present existential concerns.  
 Dream work in this phenomenological mode further serves the goal in existenti al 
analysis of facilitating a greater sense of openness, autonomy, and responsibi lity within 
the client. Craig and Walsh(1993) explain that using this approach, the dreamer's own 
encounter and discovery of the meaning emerging from their dreams and connected to 
their waking life is primary rather than a reliance on the expertise of t he analytic 
translator. 
 Darren Langdridge (2006) brings together insight from Winnicott, Boss, and the 
narrative hermeneutics of Paul Ricoeur in his explication of the possibilities  of dream-
work in an existential frame. Langdridge describes Winnicott's emphasis  on the need to 
play and learn in a transitional space, safe from the demands of everyday rea lity. He 
notes that dreams present us with such a transitional space, as does the therapeutic  frame; 
both are spaces in which “everyday concerns” can be relaxed or bracketed and make  way 
for a creative play that is instrumental in how we establish self-narratives . Langdridge 
suggests that if approached from a phenomenological, playful and curious point of view, 
working with dreams within the therapeutic context can provide a “relatively unique  
opportunity for critical reflection on (clients) sense of selfhood” (2006, p. 4). Langdr idge 
22Graduate Journal of Counseling Psychology, Vol. 3, Iss. 1 [2012], Art. 3
http://epublications.marquette.edu/gjcp/vol3/iss1/3

DREAM WORK IN PSYCHOTHERAPY   
 
notes a number of “fractions” which structure our experience including selfhood, 
sociality, embodiment, temporality, spatiality, projects, and discourse. He sugge sts that 
these structures of experience are equally present in our dreaming conscious ness, and 
elaborates in specific the applicability of Ricouer's notion of narrative identi ty for 
strengthening a phenomenological dream analysis. Ricouer compares narrative  identity to 
the psychoanalytic concept of “working through”, “where a client substitutes a  coherent 
narrative for fragments of their experience that they find unbearable” (L angdridge, 2006, 
p. 7), and suggests that persons make sense of their own identity through developing a 
story about their life. Ricouer, along with other post-structuralist thinkers, sugg est that 
identity is not comprised of an established, unitary, essential notion of self, but rat her is 
continuously made through the stories that one identifies with. Langdridge sta tes that this 
conceptualization highlights the importance of attending to the stories of self-hood that  
the client presents within the context of the “play space” of the dream. He ar ticulates the 
following questions as primary to illuminating these narratives; “What story of the self is 
being narrated in the dream and why now; What limits and possibilities of selfhood ar e 
recounted in the story; How do these limits and possibilities relate first to the i mmediate 
context of the telling and then the wider context of the client's being-in-the -world” (2006, 
p. 8).  
 Finally, there is a potentially therapeutic value from the existential  perspective 
inhering in the simple fact of becoming present to, and providing sanctuary for, the 
telling and investigating of dream material as a unique emergence fr om the subjectivity 
of the client. Craig and Walsh cite J.F.T. Bugental's notion of presence as “the qualit y of 
being in a situation in which one intends to be as aware and as participative as one is a ble 
23Caperton: Dream-Work in Psychotherapy
Published by e-Publications@Marquette, 2012

DREAM WORK IN PSYCHOTHERAPY   
 
to be...Presence is carried into effect through mobilization of one's inner (subjec tive) and 
outer (the situation and other persons in it) sensitivities” (Bugental as quoted in C raig & 
Walsh, 1993). Bugental suggests that this coming-into-presence can have the eff ect of 
giving clients a vital sense of their capacity for self-direction and autonom y. As an 
avenue to this presencing, existential dream analysts may attempt to bring a ttention to the 
clients bodily sensations and emotions, question how the dreamer is experiencing the 
here-and-now process of working with the dream, and ask how the dreamer feels a bout 
the therapists questions (Craig E., & Walsh, S., 1993). They suggest that the 
establishment, maintenance, and reflection on the clients own presence can serve  to 
develop insight in the form of “inner-sight of ones own being” (p.151), which for these 
authors is in and of itself a positive therapeutic outcome.  
 Ernest Hartmann, though not explicitly an existential psychotherapist, 
nevertheless presents an argument congruent with the notion that dreaming is one m ode 
of thinking or being which is on a continuum with waking consciousness, rather than a 
totally “other” or “unconscious” phenomenon. He provides evidence from a variety of 
studies which reveal the similarities between waking and dreaming conce rns, both 
emotional and otherwise (Domhoff, 2007, Schredl, 2007, Hartmann, 2010). Stemming 
from this position, Hartmann argues for a more phenomenological style of working with 
dreams within a therapeutic context. Hartmann rejects the notion that therapis ts must be 
trained in the specific metapsychological theories which inform traditional  
psychoanalytic approaches, in as much as he views dreams as a far edge of a continuum 
of thinking – or as an existentialist might suggest, an edge or horizon of being. Har tmann 
also accords with the existentialist view that dreams likely relate t o underlying current-
24Graduate Journal of Counseling Psychology, Vol. 3, Iss. 1 [2012], Art. 3
http://epublications.marquette.edu/gjcp/vol3/iss1/3

DREAM WORK IN PSYCHOTHERAPY   
 
life emotional concerns of the dreamer. He suggests that dream-workers, ofte n working in 
time limited settings, begin their work with the Central Image, based on a number  of 
studies pointing to the Central Image as being most loaded with emotional signif icance 
(Hartmann 2010). In this suggestion, Hartmann seems to depart from the existentia l-
phenomenological view which emphasizes the epoche or bracketing of expectations 
inasmuch as he would have the therapist direct the focus of the client toward a specific  
image. This difference could be avoided by investigating what the dreamer c onsiders to 
be the Central Image, and beginning from this point rather than the therapist’s vi ew of 
what is most “central”, as it is likely these two viewpoints would often not wholly a ccord.  
Cognitive-Experiential Model 
 A number of integrative approaches to working with dreams in psychotherapy 
have emerged in the last few decades. An approach which has ushered in the most 
empirical research is the Cognitive-Experiential model, developed and revise d by Hill 
(1996, 2003). This model is informed by psychoanalytic, existential-phenomenological, 
gestalt, and behavioral approaches, and is described by three stages relate d to these 
theories. These stages are exploration, insight, and action, loosely conforming to the 
experiential (existential-phenomenological), analytic, and behavioral model s. Hill 
describes her approach as resting on a number of assumptions, as follows. She assumes  
that dreams represent a continuation of waking thought; that their meaning is pers onal, 
and as such symbolic translations reside within the persons experience and not a codif ied 
rubric; that work with dreams requires collaboration between the therapist and cl ient, 
rather than the therapist acting as expert interpreter; that dreams can be  useful for 
developing a deeper self-understanding; that dreams are comprised of cognitive , emotive, 
25Caperton: Dream-Work in Psychotherapy
Published by e-Publications@Marquette, 2012

DREAM WORK IN PSYCHOTHERAPY   
 
and behavioral elements; and lastly that therapists should be grounded in basic 
therapeutic skills prior to undertaking dream work (Hill, C.E., & Knox, S., 2010). Eudell-
Simmons and Hilsenroth (2007) note the manner in which the cognitive component of 
this work emerges through the emphasis on assimilation and adaptation, which they 
suggest is an extension or elaboration of the manner in which the mind processes 
information. 
 The first stage in the Hill model is exploration, in which the dream is recounte d in 
the present tense, in an attempt to re-enter the feelings and images presented b y the 
dream. This stage is analogous to Craig & Walsh's “explication” stage, and is  congruent 
with Hillman's emphasis on dwelling in the specificity of the images as they  are. This 
exploration includes description, but also associations and indications of any waking li fe 
triggers that the client can connect to the images.  
 After several images have been explored, the therapist moves the client towa rd 
the insight stage. In this stage, the client and therapist collaborate to establi sh some 
meaning from the dream. This meaning can be revealed at multiple levels, ag ain 
reflective of the multiple theoretical schools the model is founded on. Pesant and Zadra 
(2004) describe some of these possible avenues for insight. At the waking-life level , the 
dream can be linked to current or past waking life emotional concerns, experiences, 
thoughts, or memories. The dream can also be understood from a Jungian-subjective 
interpretive mode, in which the images are thought to represent aspects of the s elf. The 
dream can reveal insight in the here-and-now of the therapy session itself, a s the team 
works to explore how the dream was told, what the dreamer experienced in the telli ng 
right now, without relying on the notion of the dream as being a metaphorical 
26Graduate Journal of Counseling Psychology, Vol. 3, Iss. 1 [2012], Art. 3
http://epublications.marquette.edu/gjcp/vol3/iss1/3

DREAM WORK IN PSYCHOTHERAPY   
 
representation. The dream may also be probed for existential or spiritual insig ht. Lastly, 
the dream may reveal insight at the relational level, in which some aspect of t he dreamers 
current relations whether within or without therapy are being expressed.  
 The final stage of this dream work diverges most explicitly from the previous ly 
reviewed models. In this stage, the client is encouraged to explore the ways i n which she 
would like to change the dream. The therapist subsequently encourages the client  to make 
a bridge between the changes they envision for the dream and changes they could bring  
to their waking life concerns, and assists in helping them plan how to implement these 
changes (Hill & Knox, 2010). Though not made explicit, this sort of development of a 
notion of personal autonomy both within the dream and in waking life is parallel to the 
existential-phenomenological concern with bringing increased potentialities  into 
awareness and the analytic goal of encouraging conversation between the consci ous and 
unconscious aspects of the self. What differentiates this approach is the direct li ne of 
focus on encouraging concrete behavioral change.  
Usefulness and Effectiveness of Dream Work 
 The majority of literature illustrating the clinical utility and eff icacy of working 
with dreams in therapy is comprised of case studies from within the various theoret ical 
schools (Peasant & Zadra, 2004). Hill and Knox (2010) point out that these case studies 
are often anecdotal, and even when empirical may have an inherent bias in terms of 
selection factors and problems with generalizability. Nevertheless, a  synthesis of these 
studies has indicated that there are three general types of gains describe d as a result of 
dream work. These gains are in the domains of client insight, increased involvement  in 
the therapeutic process, and a better understanding (for the clinician and client)  of the 
27Caperton: Dream-Work in Psychotherapy
Published by e-Publications@Marquette, 2012

DREAM WORK IN PSYCHOTHERAPY   
 
client's dynamics and clinical progress (Peasant & Zadra, 2004). Eudel l-Simmons and 
Hilsenroth (2005) differentiate the third factor into two domains; providing clinica l 
information to therapists and indicating clinical change or improvement.  
 A significant body of empirical research has been emerging in the past dec ade 
examining the process and outcome of utilizing dream work, especially utilizi ng the Hill 
Cognitive-Experiential model. Hill and Knox (2010) summarize the research on 
outcomes following dream work along three domains; session quality, goals of dream-
work (e.g. insight, action ideas), and broader outcomes for psychotherapy such as 
symptom change, increased satisfaction in interpersonal functioning, and well- being.  
 Session quality has been measured primarily by administration of the Depth S cale 
of the Session Evaluation Questionnaire (SEQ) to the therapist and client follow ing a 
single-session of dream-work in the Hill model. The SEQ measures ratings of de pth, 
working alliance, and session satisfaction. Ackerman, Hilsenroth, Baity, and B lagys 
(2000) found that high ratings of the quality and depth of a session are associated with 
clients feeling more engaged in therapy, as well as feeling more c ollaborative and 
supported by the therapist. Hill and Groates (2004) summarize 12 of these studies fi nding 
that clients consistently rated dream session quality significantly highe r than regular 
therapy sessions.  
 Insight gains through dream work have been assessed via a variety of methods 
including open ended questions of clients following dream work sessions, standard 
measurements of insight and understanding, and objective ratings of insight descr ibed by 
clients interpretations of dream material (Hill & Groates, 2004). Hill and Gr oates 
summarize these various approaches and find significant evidence for gains in ins ight 
28Graduate Journal of Counseling Psychology, Vol. 3, Iss. 1 [2012], Art. 3
http://epublications.marquette.edu/gjcp/vol3/iss1/3

DREAM WORK IN PSYCHOTHERAPY   
 
following dream work. Hill et al (2006) also found that clients report increased 
functioning on target problems following dream focused therapy sessions based on pre 
and post-dream session assessment.  
 Hill and Knox (2010) also describe broader outcomes for therapy generally 
following dream work. They note that some research has described decreases in gene ral 
symptoms and depression, as well as increases in existential well-being w hen “spiritual 
insight” is the focus of dream work. They note mixed results in terms of interpers onal 
functioning following dream work.  
 Researchers have also been establishing evidence regarding the proces s of dream 
work. Hill and Knox (2010) summarize a variety of factors that contribute to the 
therapeutic process of dream work. They note four studies that provide evidence for t he 
importance of client involvement in contributing to positive outcome. Specifically, clients 
who are more involved (in terms of actively exploring, contributing ideas, coming up 
with insights) in sessions are more likely to report positive outcomes. Additionall y, it 
appears that client's who are motivated and involved in the sessions, but not 
overwhelmed by affect are most likely to gain insight.  
 Hill and Knox also summarize evidence as to what types of clients appear to 
benefit most from dream work. Their findings suggest that the clients most like ly to 
benefit from dream work are persons who have “positive attitudes towards dreams , high 
self-efficacy or confidence in their ability to work with dreams, who have s alient dreams 
that are puzzling or...reflect underlying concerns, who have low insight and action ide as 
related to their dreams, and who are willing to discuss their dreams in therapy”  (Hill, 
C.E., & Knox, S., 2010, p. 305).  
29Caperton: Dream-Work in Psychotherapy
Published by e-Publications@Marquette, 2012

DREAM WORK IN PSYCHOTHERAPY   
 
 Pesant and Zadra (2004) summarize major findings from their literature revi ew of 
the clinical use of dreams. Their research indicates two major benefits to worki ng on 
dreams clinically. The first benefit is the potential for insight gains af ter dream work. The 
second is the suggestion that collaborative dream interpretation may facilit ate greater 
client participation in therapy generally.  
 Hill and Knox (2010) concede that the majority of these studies were conducted 
under conditions of experimental purity that are not readily generalizable to ther apy in 
the real world. A specific feature that seems salient is the fact that m ost of these studies 
were based on single-session's. It would be worthwhile to develop a method for 
examining change and efficacy of dream work situated in more clinically pa rallel 
settings, including seeing how working with dreams over time may contribute to insi ght 
or other therapeutically valuable outcomes.  
Conclusion 
 Over the last 120 years, dreams have moved from an object of fascination, 
speculation, and somewhat mysterious occurrence to a position in which they are 
beginning to be more typically understood both physiologically and psychologically . 
Clearly, there are a vast number of theoretical approaches that have att empted to describe 
the function, etiology, and clinical usefulness of dreams. This paper has attempte d to 
summarize some of the theoretical understandings underlying four major approache s to 
working with dreams observed in clinical settings today.  
 There are major difficulties in empirically studying the utility and effectiveness of 
dream work. Inroads have been made, especially in the last decade, in beginning to te ase 
apart some of what contributes to the process and outcome of working with dreams. This  
30Graduate Journal of Counseling Psychology, Vol. 3, Iss. 1 [2012], Art. 3
http://epublications.marquette.edu/gjcp/vol3/iss1/3

DREAM WORK IN PSYCHOTHERAPY   
 
work has been constrained mainly to the cognitive-experiential model, and has suffe red 
somewhat from the nature of these studies. The fact is that much of the dream work tha t 
occurs in therapy happens in an ongoing setting, drastically different than the s ingle-
session experimentally controlled settings that much of this research has re lied on in 
order to limit external variables.  
 The fact that clinicians from widely varied theoretical backgrounds appear  to be 
interested in working with dreams, and the fact that clients may have an expe ctation that 
clinicians will be able to assist them in understanding their dreams points to the 
importance of training and exposure to theories of dream-work.  
 Effective implementation of any of the theories discussed above may serve to 
elaborate unconscious conflicts, examine patterns of behavior and implicit cognit ive 
schema, and, when undertaken in a spirit of collaboration, serve to transfer authority ove r 
to the client.  
 More work remains in empirically validating the process and outcomes of longer -
term, ongoing dream work as well as establishing experimental validity for  some of the 
less tested theories of working with dreams.  Part of the difficulty of this sor t of work 
resides in arriving at common terms about the ultimate goals of therapy – w hether 
symptom reduction or an increased acceptance of both ones autonomy and limitations, 
increased societal adaptation or increased imaginative capacity of one's ps ychological 
reality.  
 Whichever of these aims emerges in therapeutic work, it appears that working  
with dream material can provide avenues toward these divergent ends.  
 
 
 
31Caperton: Dream-Work in Psychotherapy
Published by e-Publications@Marquette, 2012

DREAM WORK IN PSYCHOTHERAPY   
 
References 
32Graduate Journal of Counseling Psychology, Vol. 3, Iss. 1 [2012], Art. 3
http://epublications.marquette.edu/gjcp/vol3/iss1/3

DREAM WORK IN PSYCHOTHERAPY   
 
References 
Ackerman, S.J., Hilsenroth, M.J., Baity, M.R., & Blagys, M.D. (2000). Interaction of  
therapeutic process and alliance during psychological assessment. Journal of 
Personality Assessment, 75(1), 82-109.  
 
Beebe, J. (1993) Working with Dreams: A Jungian Approach. In New Directions in  
Dream Interpretation, ed. G. Delaney. Albany, NY: State University of New 
York Press.   
 
Bosnak, R., (2007) Embodiment: Creative Imagination in Medicine, Art, and Travel .  
Routledge. New York, NY 
 
Boyd, J (2005) Where two worlds meet: an exploration of client's experience of drea m- 
 work in time limited therapy.  Psychodynamic Practice , 11(2), 189-204 
 
Cambray, J., & Carter, L. (2004) Analytical  Psychology. Contemporary Perspectives in  
 Jungian Analysis. Hove & New York: Brunner-Routledge 
 
Cartwright, R. (1977). Night Life: Explorations in dreaming. Englewood Cliffs, NJ:  
 Prentice Hall, Inc.  
 
Craig, E., & Walsh, S. (1993) Phenomenological challenges for the clinical use of  
 dreams.  In New Directions in Dream Interpretation, ed. G. Delaney. Albany, NY:  
 State University of New York Press.   
 
Dombeck, M.T.B. (1991). Dreams and professional personhood: The contexts of dream  
 telling and dream interpretation among American psychologists. Albany, NY:  
 SUNY Press 
 
Domhoff, W.G. (2007) Realistic simulation and bizarreness in dream content: Past  
 findings and suggestions for future research. In D. Barret & P. McNamara (E ds.),  
 The New Science of Dreaming (Vol. 2, p. 1-27). Praeger. Westport, CT.  
 
Eudell-Simmons, E., & Hilsenroth, M. (2007). The Use of Dreams in Psychotherapy: An 
 Integrative Model. Journal of Psychotherapy Integration, Vol. 17(4), 330-356. doi: 
 10.1037/1053-0479.17.4.330 
 
Hartmann, E. (2010) Meteorite or Gemstone? Dreaming as One End of a Continuum of 
 Functioning: Implications for Research and for the Use of Dreams in Therapy  and  
 Self- Knowledge. Dreaming, Vol. 20(3), 149-168. doi: 10.1037a0020575 
 
Hall, J., (1983) Jungian Dream Interpretation. Inner City Books. Toronto, Canada.  
 
Hill, C.E. (1996). Working with dreams in psychotherapy. New York, NY: Guiliford  
Press.  
33Caperton: Dream-Work in Psychotherapy
Published by e-Publications@Marquette, 2012

DREAM WORK IN PSYCHOTHERAPY   
 
 
Hill, C.E. (2003) Working with dreams in therapy: Facilitating exploration, insight, and  
action. Washington DC: American Psychological Association.  
 
Hill, C.E., & Groates, M.K. (2004). Research on the Hill cognitive-experiential drea m  
model. In: Dream Work in Therapy: Facilitating Exploration, Insight, and Act ion  
(C.E. Hill, ed.), American Psychological Association, Washington, DC, pp. 245-
288.  
 
Hill, C., & Knox, S., (2010) The Use of Dreams in Psychotherapy.  International Review  
of Neurobiology , 92, 291-317. doi:10.1016/S00742(10)92013-8   
 
Hillman, J. (1979) The Dream and The Underworld. Harper and Row. New York, NY.  
 
Hillman, J. (1983) Archetypal Psychology: A Brief Account. Spring Publications. Dallas,  
TX.  
 
Hillman, J. (1998) Inter-Views. Spring Publications. Dallas, TX. 
 
Hobson, J.A. (2004) Freud Returns? Like a bad dream. Scientific American, 2004 
 
Jung, C.G. (1954) The Development of Personality, CW 17 . Princeton, NJ: Princeton  
University Press 
 
Jung, C.G. (1954) The Practice of Psychotherapy, CW 16 . Princeton, NJ: Princeton  
University Press 
 
Jung, C.G. (1958) Psychology and Religion, East and West, CW 11 . Princeton, NJ:  
Princeton University Press 
 
Jung, C.G. (1959) Aion, CW 9, II . Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press 
 
Jung, C.G. (1960) The Structure and Dynamics of the Psyche, CW 8 .  Princeton, NJ:  
Princeton University Press 
 
Jung, C.G. (1974) Dreams. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press 
 
Knudson, R. (2003) The Significant Dream as Emblem of Uniqueness. Dreaming, Vol.  
13(3), p. 121-134 
 
Knudson, R., Adame, A., & Ginocan, G. (2006) Significant Dreams: Repositioning the  
Self Narrative. Dreaming, Vol 16(3), 215-222. doi:10.1037/1053-0797.16.3.215 
 
Langdridge, D. (2006) Imaginative Variations on Selfhood: Elaborating an ex istential-
 phenomenological approach to dream analysis. Existential Analysis: Journal of  
the Society for Existential Analysis , 17(1), pp. 2–13. 
34Graduate Journal of Counseling Psychology, Vol. 3, Iss. 1 [2012], Art. 3
http://epublications.marquette.edu/gjcp/vol3/iss1/3

DREAM WORK IN PSYCHOTHERAPY   
 
 
Mattoon, M.A. (1978) Understanding Dreams. Spring Publications, Dallas, TX.  
 
Pesant, N., & Zadra, A. (2004) Working with dreams in therapy: What do we know and  
 what  should we do? Clinical Psychology Review , 24, 489-512. doi:  
 10.1016/j.cpr.2004.05.002 
  
Scott, C., (editor) (1977) On Dreaming: An Encounter with Medard Boss. Scholars Press,  
 Chico, CA.  
 
Sherwood, D. (2006). Response to Margaret Wilkinson. Journal of Analytical  
Psychology , 51(1), 61-65. doi:10.1111/j.0021-8774.2006.00572.x 
 
Shelburne, W.A. (1984) A Critique of James Hillman's Approach To The Dream. Journal  
 of Analytical Psychology, 29, 35-56.  
 
Schredl, M. (2007). Dream Recall: Models and Empirical Data. In D. Barret & P.  
 McNamara (Eds.), The New Science of Dreaming (Vol. 2, p. 79-114). Praeger.  
 Westport, CT.  
 
Watson, B (translator), (1968). The Complete Works of Chuang Tzu . New York:  
 Columbia  University Press 
 
Wilkinson, M. (2006). The dreaming mind-brain: a Jungian perspective. Journal of  
Analytical Psychology , 51(1), 43-59. doi:10.1111/j.0021-8774.2006.00571.x 
 
Wyatt, R., Goodwyn, E., & Ignatowski, M. (2011) A Jungian approach to dreams  
reported by soldiers in a modern combat zone. Journal of Analytical Psychology,  
56(2), 217-231. 
 
Ullman, M., & Zimmerman, N., (1979) Working with Dreams. Jeremey P. Tarcher, Inc.  
 Los Angeles, CA 
 
35Caperton: Dream-Work in Psychotherapy
Published by e-Publications@Marquette, 2012

