Dreams by C.G Jung  
 
A Review by David Edwards  
 
This collected work of Jung’s writings on dreams, provides an in  depth look at 
the workings of the unconscious aspect of the human psyche, an d in turn the 
psyche as a whole.  As most human beings spend nearly half o f their lives 
sleeping, it is quite clear that dreams provide an importan t role in the overall 
workings of the human mind.  The Freudian school of psychoa nalysis 
provided a very simplified investigation as to the signif icance of dreams, 
frequently labelling much of the symbolism encountered in  the non-waking 
state as repressed wish- fulfilment.   This seems like an oversimplified 
approach to the unconscious.  Jungian psychoanalysis attached f ar greater 
importance to dreams, and that they can reveal a great dea l about the 
psychological and physical state of the dreamer, as well as p roviding a 
window into the operations of the collective consciousness of  humanity: 
 
“... The dream does in fact concern itself with both health  and sickness, and 
since, by virtue of its source in the unconscious, it draws upon a  wealth of 
subliminal perceptions, it can sometimes produce things that are worth 
knowing. ...” 
 
“... Even though dreams refer to a definite psychic situation, their roots lie 
deep in the unfathomably dark recesses of the conscious mind.  For want of a 
more descriptive term we call this unknown background the unconsci ous.  We 
do not know its nature in and for itself, but we observe cert ain effects from 
whose qualities we venture certain conclusions in regard to the  nature of the 
unconscious psyche.  Because dreams are the most common expression of 
the unconscious psyche, they provide the bulk of the material f or its 
investigation. ...” 
 
“... The view that dreams are merely the imaginary fulfilmen ts of repressed 
wishes is hopelessly out of date.  There are, it is true, drea ms which 
manifestly represent wishes or fears, but what about all the other 
things?  Dreams may contain ineluctable truths, philosophical  
pronouncements, illusions, wild fantasies, memories, plans, a nticipations, 
irrational experiences, even telepathic visions, and heaven know s what 
besides. ... It is certain that the conscious mind consists not only of wishes 
and fears, but of vastly more besides;  and it is highly proba ble that our dream 
psyche possesses a wealth of contents and living forms equal to or even 
greater than those of the conscious mind, which is characterised by 
concentration, limitation, and exclusion. ...” 
 
The latter part of the book provides a selection of a series dreams recorded 
by a patient  of Jung and his associates.  These dreams and their subsequent  
analysis provide a view of the process of individuation at  work in the 
unconscious aspect of the mind of the patient.  Archetypal t hemes are present 
in many of the dreams analysed, which can manifest universal  problems in 
each of our lives such as the zenith of one’s life in middl e age: 

 
“... The egoconscious personality is only a part of the whole man, and its life 
does not yet represent his total life.  The more he is merel y ‘I’, the more he 
splits himself off from the collective man, of whom he is a lso a part, and may 
even find himself in opposition to him.  But since everythin g living strives for 
wholeness, the inevitable one-sidedness of our conscious life i s continually 
being corrected and compensated by the universal being in us, whose goal is 
the ultimate integration of conscious and unconscious, or bet ter, the 
assimilation of the ego to a wider personality. ...”  
 
This compensation between unconscious and conscious can sometime s 
manifest negatively, with the former overwhelming the l atter. The result of an 
imbalance such as this is a manifestation of neurosis or psychosi s in the 
personality. With either of these symptomatic states of bei ng the individual 
finds their reality overwhelmed by their delusions, and pro jects their fears onto 
their external environment ultimately failing to distin guish between reality and 
fantasy, or between conscious and unconscious processes. Dreams can a ct 
as a means of bringing harmony to this delicate balance, a lthough this is 
never a quick process and usually will play itself out over a  series of dreams 
in successive steps through symbols and the deeper resonance associa ted 
with them.   
 
This process spontaneously expressing itself through symbolism is the 
essence of what Jung referred to as the ‘ individuation process ’, where the self 
is made whole. He asserts that: 
 
“... It is ... possible [that] the motifs accompanying the individuation process 
appear chiefly and pre-dominantly in a dream-series recorded unde r analysis, 
whereas in ‘extra-analytical’ dream series they occur only at much g reater 
intervals of time. ...” 
 
Jung confesses that he does not have the data to reinforce t his assertion, so 
therefore it is not a definitive statement, but still carri es weight even as an 
assertion, as the logic here is that a trained dream analyst will be able to 
extrapolate a better understanding for the patient which in turn will ignite the 
archetypal patterns at play in the dream series. 
 
Freud’s work displayed the assertion that the unconscious is a d angerous 
monster, spawned from the primitive heart of humanity, an d that treatment of 
neurological and psychological disorders could only be approach ed from the 
side of consciousness alone.  Jung made the opposite assertion that such 
disorders needed to be achieved by ‘thorough and conscious assimilation of 
unconscious contents’.  Jung saw that the repression of the unconscious, and 
indeed the whole attitude of demonising it as somethin g which needed to be 
repressed, was the instance where it could become dangerous and  
overwhelm consciousness: 
 
“... The psyche is a self-regulating system that maintains its e quilibrium just as 
the body does.  Every process that goes too far immediately and inevitably 
calls forth compensations, and without these there would be  neither a normal 

metabolism nor a normal psyche.  In this sense we can take the  theory of 
compensation as a basic law of psychic behaviour.  Too little on one side 
results in too much on the other.  Similarly, the relation b etween conscious 
and unconscious is compensatory.  This is one of the best proven rules of 
dream interpretation. ...”  
 
Modern man is hardwired to view the unconscious aspect of the  psyche as 
something less real than the conscious side.  This resistance be tween the two 
and the subsequent reduction of validity with regards to t he unconscious have 
sprung from historical necessity in the evolution of the hum an psyche;  without 
this erosion of attitude towards the unconscious, the conscious mind would 
never have been able to individuate itself.  However, Jung asserts (and I am 
inclined to agree) that modern man has strayed too far from the reality of the 
unconscious.  Due to the sinister correlation with insanity th e unconscious 
induces fearful panic in ‘civilised’ people, and as a resul t the intellect has no 
problem with a rationalist analytical view of it as a pa ssive object.  Rather than 
engage the unconscious as a reality and let it flow comple tely, the temptation 
in Western culture is to ignore it and not seek any further u nderstanding of the 
problem.  This adherence to the spirit of convention stems f rom the regulation 
of our psychic lives by institutions and reason through the ce nturies; dogma, 
whether religious or scientific, has offered protection against  the intrusion of 
the dangers of the unconscious.  However, dogma does not la st forever, and 
even in religion the same archetypal patterns and symbols ca n be found at 
play via the collective unconscious. 
 
“... Religious symbols are phenomena of life, plain facts a nd not intellectual 
opinions.  If the Church clung for so long to the idea th at the sun rotates 
around the earth, and then abandoned this contention in  the nineteenth 
century, she can always appeal to the psychological truth that for millions of 
people the sun did revolve round the earth and that it was o nly in the 
nineteenth century that any major portion of mankind became  sufficiently sure 
of the intellectual function to grasp the proofs of the e arth’s planetary 
nature.  Unfortunately there is no ‘truth’ unless there are p eople to understand 
it. ...”   
 
“... even if the conscious mind is miles away from the ancient  conceptions of 
the rites of renewal, the unconscious still strives to bring the m closer in 
dreams.  It is true that without the qualities of autono my and autarky there 
would be no consciousness at all, yet these qualities also spe ll the danger of 
isolation and stagnation since, by splitting off from the unconscious, they bring 
about an unbearable alienation of instinct.  Loss of inst inct is the source of 
endless error and confusion. ...”   
“... significant dreams ... are often remembered for a lifet ime, and not 
infrequently prove to be the richest jewel in the treasure-hou se of psychic 
experience. ... I have examined many such dreams, and of ten found in them a 
peculiarity which distinguishes them from other dreams : they co ntaining 
symbolical images which we also come across in the mental histo ry of 
mankind. It is worth noting that the dreamer does not nee d to have any inkling 
of the existence of such parallels.  This peculiarity is characte ristic of dreams 
of the individuation process, where we find the mythologica l motifs or 

mythologems I have designated as archetypes.  These are to be understood 
as specific forms and groups of images which occur not only at al l times and 
in all places but also in individual dreams, fantasies, visio ns, and delusional 
ideas.  Their frequent appearance in individual case materia l, as well as their 
universal distribution, prove that the human psyche is unique and subjective 
or personal only in part, and for the rest is collective and ob jective. ...” 
 
As human beings we are hardwired to perceive and recognise pat terns and 
stories within many aspects of our reality.  With our dreams, we are presented 
with a narrative directly from the unconscious, in many instan ces a shared 
aspect of our psyche is revealed to us through our dreams.  Thro ugh dream 
analysis we are presented with an attempt by the conscious m ind to 
understand what these unconscious patterns and archetypal energ ies are 
trying to tell us. Maybe if we can understand how they a re weaving through 
our unconscious reality better, we can understand how they are  affecting the 
waking dream of our conscious life. 
 

