JUNG'S DREAM THEORY
The dream theory of Carl G . Jung (1875-1961)
Is one of the most important and widely influen-
tial dream theories in modern depth psychology
(that branch of psychology that studies the un-
conscious as its main object) . Jung, a Swiss medi-
cal doctor, was at one time Freud's closest friend
and leading student ; however, Jung and Freud had
a bitter falling out in 1914, in part because of

their different theories of the nature and function
of dreams (see FREUD'S DREAM THEORY) .
In Jung's view, dreams are the direct, natural
expression of the current condition of the
dreamer's mental world . Jung rejected Freud's
claim that dreams intentionally disguise their
meanings ; rather, Jung believed that the nature
of dreams is to present "a spontaneous self-
portrayal, in symbolic form, of the actual situa-
tion in the unconscious" (Jung, 1967, Vol . 8, par.
505). Jung claimed that dreams speak in a dis-
tinctive language of symbols, images, and meta-
phors, a language that is the unconscious mind's
natural means of expression . We have trouble un-
derstanding dreams, Jung said, only because this
symbolic language Is so different from the Ian-*
guage of our waking consciousness .
Dreams sometimes portray the dreamer's rela-
tion with the external world, that Is, with the
people, events, and activities of the dreamer's
daily life . Jung called this the objective level of a
dream's meaning . At other times, dreams portray
the dreamer's inner world ; the dream figures are'
personifications of thoughts and feelings within
the dreamer's own psyche . This, Jung said, is the
subjective level of a dream's meaning . Jung criti-
cized Freud for acknowledging only the objective
level; the true nature of dreams, Jung believed, is
to portray both these levels of the dreamer's life .
Jung stated that dreams serve two functions .
One function Is to compensate for imbalances in
the dreamer's psyche . Dreams bring forth uncon-
scious contents that consciousness has either ig-
nored, depreciated, or actively repressed . For
example, if a person is overly intellectual, his or
her dreams willwork to balance this conscious
excess by bringing forth images of the psyche's
more emotion-oriented contents . According to
Jung, when the dreamer recognizes and accepts
these unconscious contents, greater psychologi-
cal balance is achieved . The second function of
dreams is to provide prospective images of the fu-
ture. Jung agrees with Freud that dreams may
look backward to past experiences, but he argues
that dreams also look forward to anticipate what
the dreamer's future developments may be . Jung
did not mean that dreams predict the future, only
that dreams can suggest what might happen, what
possibilities the future might hold . Ultimately,
Jung believed that dreams function to promote
the most important developmental . process of
human life, namely, the uniting of consciousness
and the unconscious in a healthy, harmoniousstate of wholeness . Jung calls this process indi-
viduation, the "complete actualization of the
whole human being" (Jung, 1967, Vol . 16, par.
352).
One of the most distinctive features of Jung's
theory of dreams is his claim that dreams express
not just'personal contents, but also collective or
universal contents . Jung believed that dreams fre-
quently contain archetypes, universal psychic
images that underlie all human thought . (Com-
mon archetypal figures described by Jung are the
wise old man, the great mother, the trickster, the
divine child, and the shadow .) Archetypes reflect
a natural wisdom deep within the human uncon-
scious; archetypal images in dreams can provide
the dreamer with special insights and guidance
along the path toward individuation . Jung be-
lieved that the world's religious and mythologi-
cal traditions contain a wealth of archetypal
images, and he refers to . these traditions in de-
scribing the nature and function of dreams .
Jung's dream theory has been criticized for
being perilously close to mysticism and the oc-
cult. Jung insisted, however, that his theory of
dreams is based on strictly empirical obser-
vations. He claimed to have interpreted over
80,000 dreams during his almost 60 years of
clinical practice ; Jung said his theory simply at-
tempts to describe and classify the dream phe-
nomena he had observed .
REFERENCES
HomansP. 1979. Jung in context .Chicago: Univer-
sity of Chicago Press . A study of Jung's relationship
with Freud .
Jung CG.1965. Memories, dreams, reflections .New
York: Vintage. Jung's autobiography, filled with
dream accounts ; esse:ttial to understanding his life
and theories .
.1967. Man and his symbols .New York : Dell.
Jung's last work, an explanation of his psychology
In nontechnical terms .
.1967. The collected works of C .G. Jung.
Princeton, NJ : Princeton University Press, 1967.
Jung discusses dreams throughout the 18 volumes
of his writings . The key works on dreams are the fol-
lowing: General Aspects of Dream Psychology, Vol .
8; On the Nature of Dreams, Vol . 8; The Practical
Use of Dream Analysis, Vol . 16; Individual Dream
Symbolism in Relation to Alchemy, Vol . 12; Two Es-
says on Analytical Psychology, Vol. 7.

Samuels A . 1985.Jung and the postjunglans . Lon-
don: Routledge & Kegan Paul . Describes post-
Jungian dream theories .
Kelly Bulkley

