Table	of	Contents
	
Title	Page
Dedication
Acknowledgements
Introduction
	
Chapter	1	-	Surface:
The	Relation	of	Ego	to	Consciousness
The	Location	of	the	Ego
Psychological	Types
Personal	Freedom
	
Chapter	2	-	The	Populated	Interior
Reaching	the	Unconscious
The	Complexes
Levels	of	the	Unconscious
Psychic	Images
Personality	Fragments
The	Structure	of	Complexes
The	Eruption	of	Complexes
	
Chapter	3	-	Psychic	Energy
Sexuality	and	Libido
The	Transformation	of	Psychic	Energy
Physics	as	a	Model

The	Source	of	Energy
Measurement	of	Psychic	Energy
The	Unity	of	Body	and	Mind
Energy,	Movement,	and	Direction
Transformations	and	Symbols
	
Chapter	4	-	The	Psyche’s	Boundaries
Archetypes	(Psychic	Universals)
The	Unconscious
Instincts
The	Relationship	between	Archetypes	and	Instincts
	
Chapter	5	-	The	Revealed	and	the	Concealed	in	Relations	with	Others
The	Ego’s	Shadow
The	Making	of	the	Shadow
The	Persona
The	Two	Sources	of	the	Persona
Persona	Development
The	Persona’s	Transformations
Integrating	Persona	and	Shadow
	
Chapter	6	-	The	Way	to	the	Deep	Interior
Defining	Anima	and	Animus
Gender	and	Anima	and	Animus
The	Development	of	the	Anima/us
Raising	Consciousness	with	Anima/us
Sexuality	and	Relationships

	
Chapter	7	-	The	Psyche’s	Transcendent	Center	and	Wholeness
Jung’s	Experience	of	the	Self
Jung’s	Definition	of	the	Self
Symbols	of	the	Self
The	Self	as	Central	Mystery	of	the	Psyche
	
Chapter	8	-	Emergence	of	the	Self
The	Psychological	Lifespan
Individuation
The	Five	Stages	of	Consciousness
A	Case	Study	in	Individuation
The	Movements	of	the	Self
	
Chapter	9	-	Of	Time	and	Eternity
Patterns	in	Chaos
Developing	the	Idea	of	Synchronicity
Synchronicity	and	Causality
Synchronicity	and	Archetypal	Theory
Mind	and	Matter
Absolute	Knowledge
A	New	Paradigm
Cosmology
	
Notes
Glossary

References
Index
Copyright	Page

For	Sarah	and	Christopher

Acknowledgments
This	book	would	not	have	been	possible	without	the	patient	typing	and
editorial	assistance	of	Lynne	Walter.	I	want	to	thank	her	for	her	dedication	and
unflagging	optimism.	I	would	also	like	to	thank	Jan	Marlan	for	her
encouragement	and	enthusiastic	support.	Those	who	have	sat	through	my
lectures	over	the	years	will	recognize	their	contributions	in	the	many	points	of
detail	that	would	not	be	in	this	text	but	for	their	questions	and	observations.
Thanks	to	all	of	you.

Introduction
You	could	timidly	explore	the
coasts	of	Africa	to	the	south,
but	going	west	there	was	nothing
except	fear,	the	unknown,	not
“our	sea”	but	the	Sea	of	Mystery,
Mare	Ignotum.
Carlos	Fuentes
The	Buried	Mirror
	
	
	
The	summer	Jung	died,	I	was	preparing	to	go	to	college.	It	was	1961.	Humans
were	beginning	to	explore	outer	space,	and	the	race	was	on	to	see	who	would
be	the	first	to	reach	the	moon,	the	Americans	or	the	Russians.	All	eyes	were
focused	on	the	great	adventure	of	space	exploration.	For	the	first	time	in
human	history,	people	were	succeeding	in	leaving	
terra	firma
	and	traveling
toward	the	stars.	What	I	did	not	realize	at	the	time	was	that	our	century	has
been	marked	just	as	decisively	by	the	journeys	inward,	the	great	explorations
of	the	inner	world	undertaken	by	the	likes	of	Carl	Jung	in	the	decades	before
Sputnik	and	Apollo.	What	John	Glenn	and	Neil	Armstrong	have	meant	to	us
as	explorers	of	outer	space,	Jung	signifies	with	regard	to	inner	space,	a
courageous	and	intrepid	voyager	into	the	unknown.
Jung	died	peacefully	in	his	house	just	outside	Zurich,	in	a	room	that	faced
the	calm	lake	to	the	west.	To	the	south	one	could	see	the	Alps.	The	day	before
he	passed	away	he	asked	his	son	to	help	him	to	the	window	to	take	a	last	look
at	his	beloved	mountains.	He	had	spent	a	lifetime	exploring	inner	space	and
describing	what	he	found	there	in	his	writings.	By	coincidence	it	happened
that	the	
year	Neil	Armstrong	stepped	onto	the	surface	of	the	moon	I	embarked
on	a	journey	to	Zurich,	Switzerland	to	study	at	the	Jung	Institute.	What	I	am
sharing	in	this	volume	is	the	distillation	of	nearly	thirty	years	of	studying
Jung’s	map	of	the	soul.
The	aim	of	this	book	is	to	describe	Jung’s	findings	as	he	presented	them	in
his	published	writings.	First	discovering	Jung	can	itself	be	something	like
plunging	into	that	“Sea	of	Mystery”	written	about	by	Fuentes	in	his	account
of	earlier	explorers	who	ventured	across	the	Atlantic	from	Spain.	It	is	with	a

sense	of	excitement,	but	also	fear,	that	one	launches	out	into	these	far-
reaching	places.	I	remember	my	first	attempts.	I	was	swept	away	by	so	much
excitement	at	the	prospect	that	I	anxiously	sought	the	advice	of	several	of	my
university	professors.	I	wondered	if	this	was	“safe.”	Jung	was	so	attractive
that	he	seemed	too	good	to	be	true!	Would	I	become	lost,	confused,	misled?
Luckily	for	me,	these	mentors	gave	me	the	green	light,	and	I	have	been
journeying	and	finding	treasures	ever	since.
Jung’s	own	original	journey	was	even	more	frightening.	He	literally	had	no
idea	if	he	was	going	to	find	a	treasure	or	fall	over	the	edge	of	the	world	into
outer	space.	The	unconscious	was	truly	a	
Mare	Ignotum
	when	he	first	let
himself	into	it.	But	he	was	young	and	courageous,	and	he	was	determined	to
make	some	new	discoveries.	So	away	he	went.
Jung	often	referred	to	himself	as	a	pioneer	and	explorer	of	the	uncharted
mystery	that	is	the	human	soul.	He	seems	to	have	had	an	adventuresome
spirit.	For	him—as	for	us	still—the	human	psyche	was	a	vast	territory,	and	in
his	day	it	had	not	yet	been	much	studied.	It	was	a	mystery	that	challenged	the
adventuresome	with	the	prospect	of	rich	discovery	and	frightened	the	timid
with	the	threat	of	insanity.	For	Jung	the	study	of	the	soul	also	became	a	matter
of	grave	historical	importance,	for,	as	he	once	said,	the	whole	world	hangs	on
a	thread	and	that	thread	is	the	human	psyche.	It	is	vital	that	we	all	become
more	familiar	with	it.
The	great	question	is,	of	course:	Can	the	human	soul	ever	be	known,	its
depths	plumbed,	its	vast	territory	charted?	It	was	perhaps	some	leftover
nineteenth-century	scientific	grandiosity	that	led	early	pioneers	of	depth
psychology	like	Jung	and	Freud	and	
Adler	ever	to	undertake	this	effort	and	to
think	that	they	could	define	the	ineffable	and	the	supremely	inscrutable
human	psyche.	But	set	out	into	this	
Mare	Ignotum
	they	did,	and	Jung	became
a	Christopher	Columbus	of	the	inner	world.	The	twentieth	century	has	been
an	age	of	scientific	breakthroughs	and	technological	wonders	of	all	kinds;	it
has	also	been	an	age	of	deep	introspection	and	probing	into	our	common
human	subjectivity,	which	have	resulted	in	the	field	broadly	known	today	as
depth	psychology.
One	way	to	familiarize	ourselves	with	the	psyche	is	to	study	the	maps	of	it
that	have	been	drawn	up	and	made	available	by	these	great	pioneers.	In	their
works	we	can	find	many	points	of	orientation	for	ourselves,	and	perhaps	we
too	will	be	stimulated	to	carry	out	further	investigations	and	to	make	new
discoveries.	Jung’s	map	of	the	psyche,	as	preliminary	and	perhaps	unrefined
and	open-ended	as	it	is—as	are	all	first	attempts	at	charting	unknown

territories—can	still	be	a	great	boon	to	those	who	want	to	enter	inner	space,
the	world	of	the	psyche,	and	not	lose	their	way	completely.
In	this	book,	I	accept	Jung	in	his	self-designated	role	of	explorer	and
mapmaker,	and	I	let	this	image	guide	me	in	presenting	this	introduction	to	his
theory	of	the	human	psyche.	The	psyche	is	the	territory,	the	unknown	realm
he	was	exploring;	his	theory	is	the	map	he	created	to	communicate	his
understanding	of	the	psyche.	So	it	is	Jung’s	map	of	the	soul	that	I	will	attempt
to	describe	in	this	book	by	leading	you,	the	reader,	into	and	through	the
territory	of	his	writings.	In	doing	so,	I	am	presenting	a	map	of	a	map,	but	one
that	I	hope	will	be	useful	to	you	in	your	own	further	journeys	into	Jung’s	life
and	work.
Like	all	mapmakers,	Jung	worked	with	the	instruments	and	evidence
available	to	him	in	his	time.	Born	in	1875,	he	completed	his	basic	medical
studies	at	the	University	of	Basel	in	Switzerland	by	1900	and	his	psychiatric
training	at	the	Burghölzli	Klinik	in	Zurich	by	1905.	His	important	association
with	Freud	extended	from	1907	to	1913,	after	which	he	spent	some	years	in	a
deep	self-analysis	and	then	emerged	with	his	own	distinctive	psychological
theory—called	analytical	psychology—which	he	presented	to	the	world	in
1921	in	the	book	
Psychological	Types.
1
	By	1930,	aged	55,	
he	had	created
most	of	the	basic	features	of	his	theory	but	had	not	yet	detailed	a	number	of
important	items.	The	details	would	be	presented	in	the	years	following	1930
and	would	continue	to	flow	from	Jung’s	pen	until	he	died	in	1961.
The	project	of	exploring	the	human	psyche	scientifically	was	begun	early
in	Jung’s	adult	life.	His	first	official	expedition	is	described	in	his	doctoral
study,	
On	the	Psychology	and	Pathology	of	So-Called	Occult	Phenomena.
2
This	gives	a	psychological	account	of	the	inner	world	of	a	gifted	young
woman	whom	we	now	know	was	actually	his	own	cousin,	Helene	Preiswerk.
As	a	teenager,	she	had	the	unusual	ability	to	act	as	a	medium	for	spirits	of	the
dead,	who	would	speak	through	her	in	remarkably	accurate	historical	voices
and	accents.	Jung	was	fascinated	and	set	out	to	understand	and	interpret	this
puzzling	psychological	phenomenon.	Pressing	ahead,	he	used	the	word
association	test	to	uncover	hidden	features	of	the	psychic	landscape	that	had
not	been	classified	before.	These	were	published	in	numerous	papers,	which
are	now	housed	in	Volume	2	of	his	
Collected	Works
.	The	newly	discovered
features	of	the	unconscious	he	named	“complexes,”	a	term	that	would	stick
and	make	him	famous.	After	that,	he	took	up	two	burning	psychiatric
problems	of	the	day,	psychosis	and	schizophrenia,	and	produced	a	book,	
The
Psychology	of	Dementia	Praecox,
	
3
	which	he	sent	to	Freud	as	an	example	of

his	work	and	as	a	suggestion	for	how	some	of	Freud’s	ideas	could	be	applied
in	psychiatry	(Freud	was	a	neurologist).	After	receiving	Freud’s	warm	and
enthusiastic	response,	he	entered	into	a	professional	relationship	with	him	and
quickly	became	the	leader	of	the	fledgling	psychoanalytic	movement.	With
this	he	began	his	study	of	the	shadowy	regions	of	neurotic	conditions,	landing
finally	on	the	discovery	of	more	or	less	invariant	universal	fantasies	and
patterns	of	behavior	(the	archetypes)	in	an	area	of	the	deep	psyche	that	he
called	the	“collective	unconscious.”	The	description	and	detailed	account	of
the	archetype	and	the	collective	unconscious	would	become	his	signature,	a
mark	that	sets	his	map	apart	from	those	of	all	other	explorers	of	the	deep
psyche,	the	unconscious.
The	year	1930	divides	Jung’s	professional	life	almost	exactly	in	half:	in
1900	he	began	his	training	and	psychiatric	studies	at	the	
Burghölzli	Klinik,
and	in	1961	he	died	a	wise	old	man	in	his	home	at	Küsnacht	on	Lake	Zürich.
In	retrospect,	one	can	see	that	Jung’s	first	thirty	years	of	professional	activity
were	profoundly	creative.	During	these	years,	he	generated	the	basic	elements
of	a	monumental	psychological	theory	as	well	as	addressed	major	collective
issues	of	the	day.	The	second	thirty	years	were	perhaps	less	innovative	of	new
theoretical	constructs,	but	the	output	of	books	and	articles	was	even	greater
than	it	had	been	earlier.	These	were	the	years	of	deepening	and	validating
earlier	hypotheses	and	intuitions.	He	extended	his	theories	further	to	include
studies	of	history,	culture,	and	religion	and	to	create	a	key	link	to	modern
physics.	Jung’s	clinical	work	with	psychiatric	patients	and	with	analysands
was	more	consuming	and	intense	in	the	first	half	of	his	professional	life;	it
tapered	off	to	a	minimum	after	1940,	when	the	war	interrupted	normal
collective	life	in	Europe	and	Jung	himself	shortly	thereafter	also	suffered	a
heart	attack.
Jung’s	investigation	of	the	psyche	was	also	highly	personal.	His	exploration
of	the	unconscious	mind	was	not	only	carried	out	on	patients	and
experimental	subjects.	He	also	analyzed	himself.	In	fact,	for	a	time	he	became
his	own	prime	subject	of	study.	By	carefully	observing	his	own	dreams	and
developing	the	technique	of	active	imagination,	he	found	a	way	to	enter	ever
more	deeply	into	the	hidden	spaces	of	his	inner	world.	To	understand	his
patients	and	himself,	he	developed	a	method	of	interpretation	that	drew	upon
comparative	studies	in	human	culture,	myth,	and	religion;	in	fact,	he	used	any
and	all	materials	from	world	history	that	had	a	bearing	on	mental	processes.
This	method	he	called	“amplification.”
The	many	sources	and	origins	of	Jung’s	thought	have	not	yet	been	clearly
worked	out	in	detail.	In	his	writings,	he	acknowledges	a	debt	to	many	earlier

thinkers,	among	them	Goethe,	Kant,	Schopenhauer,	Carus,	Hartmann,	and
Nietzsche;	most	importantly,	he	places	himself	in	the	lineage	of	the	ancient
Gnostics	and	the	medieval	alchemists.	His	philosopher	of	choice	was	Kant.
The	influence	of	Hegel’s	dialectic	is	also	apparent	in	his	theorizing.	And
Freud	left	a	mark.	While	Jung’s	thought	can	be	shown	to	have	developed	and
grown	over	the	years	that	span	his	career,	
however,	there	is	a	remarkable
continuity	in	his	basic	intellectual	orientation.	Some	of	Jung’s	readers	have
found	seeds	of	his	later	psychological	theories	already	apparent	in	some
college	papers	delivered	at	his	fraternity	and	published	as	
The	Zofingia
Lectures
.	These	were	composed	before	1900	while	he	was	still	an
undergraduate	at	the	University	of	Basel.	The	historian	Henri	Ellenberger
goes	so	far	as	to	claim	that	the	“germinal	cell	of	Jung’s	analytical	psychology
is	to	be	found	in	his	discussion	of	the	Zofingia	Students	Association	and	in
his	experiments	with	his	young	medium	cousin,	Helene	Preiswerk.”
4
	The
Zofingia	lectures	show	Jung’s	early	struggles	with	issues	that	would	occupy
him	throughout	his	life,	such	as	the	question	of	exposing	religion	and	mystical
experience	to	scientific,	empirical	investigation.	Even	as	a	young	man,	Jung
argued	that	such	subjects	should	be	opened	up	to	empirical	research	and
approached	with	an	open	mind.	When	he	met	William	James	in	1909	at	Clark
University,	it	was	a	high	point,	because	James	had	adopted	the	same	position
and	had	produced	his	classic	study,	
Varieties	of	Religious	Experience
,	using
precisely	this	type	of	method.
From	all	of	this	study	and	experience,	then,	Jung	drew	up	a	map	of	the
human	soul.	It	is	a	map	that	describes	the	psyche	in	all	of	its	dimensions,	and
it	also	tries	to	explain	its	internal	dynamics.	But	Jung	was	always	careful	to
respect	the	psyche’s	ultimate	mystery.	His	theory	can	be	read	as	a	map	of	the
soul,	but	it	is	the	map	of	a	mystery	that	cannot	be	ultimately	captured	in
rational	terms	and	categories.	It	is	a	map	of	a	living,	Mercurial	thing,	the
psyche.
In	reading	Jung,	also,	one	needs	to	keep	in	mind	that	the	map	is	not	the
territory.	Knowledge	of	the	map	is	not	the	same	as	an	experience	of	the	deep
psyche.	At	best,	the	map	can	be	a	useful	tool	for	those	who	want	orientation
and	guidance.	For	some	who	are	lost,	it	can	even	be	a	lifesaver.	For	others,	it
will	stimulate	a	powerful	urge	to	experience	what	Jung	is	talking	about.	I
began	to	write	down	my	dreams	when	I	first	read	Jung.	Later	I	even
journeyed	to	Zürich	and	studied	for	four	years	at	the	Jung	Institute.	Through
analysis	and	personal	experience	of	the	unconscious,	I	have	gained	firsthand
knowledge	of	many	of	Jung’s	findings.	And	
yet	my	inner	world	is	not
identical	to	his.	His	map	can	show	the	way	and	can	indicate	general	outlines,

but	it	does	not	offer	specific	content.	This	must	be	discovered	for	oneself.
For	many	features	of	the	map,	Jung	relied	on	scientific	intuition	and	an
amazingly	vigorous	imagination.	The	methods	of	science	in	his	day	could	not
confirm	or	disprove	his	hypothesis	about	the	collective	unconscious,	for
instance.	Today	we	are	closer	to	being	able	to	do	that.	But	Jung	was	an	artist
who	used	his	creative	thoughts	to	fashion	a	picture	of	the	inner	world	of	the
mind.	Like	those	beautifully	illustrated	maps	of	Antiquity	and	the
Renaissance—drawn	before	mapmaking	became	scientific—the	map	that
Jung	created	is	gorgeous,	not	only	abstract.	Here	one	can	find	mermaids	and
dragons,	heroes	and	evil	characters.	As	a	scientific	investigator,	of	course,	he
was	obliged	to	test	his	hunches	and	hypothetical	constructs	empirically.	But
this	still	left	plenty	of	room	for	mythic	imagination.
Jung	worked	in	the	discipline	of	psychiatry,	or	medical	psychology	as	he
sometimes	refers	to	it.	His	chief	teacher	in	the	early	years	of	his
apprenticeship	at	the	Burghölzli	Klinik	in	Zurich	was	the	well-known	Swiss
psychiatrist	Eugen	Bleuler,	who	coined	the	term	“schizophrenia”	to	refer	to
one	of	the	most	severe	of	mental	illnesses	and	wrote	a	great	deal	about	the
psychological	issue	of	ambivalence.	As	much	as	possible,	Jung	searched	for
evidence	and	verification	for	his	theories	and	hypotheses	from	sources	outside
of	himself	and	his	own	immediate	experience.	His	range	of	reading	and	study
was	vast.	His	claim	was	that	as	an	empirical	investigator	of	the	psyche	he	was
drawing	a	map	that	described	not	only	the	territory	of	his	own	inner	world	but
one	that	referred	to	the	features	of	the	human	soul	in	general.	Like	other	great
artists,	the	pictures	he	painted	would	have	the	power	to	speak	to	people	of
many	generations	and	cultures.
My	view	is	that	this	Swiss	psychologist,	whose	name	is	today	so	widely
known	and	highly	regarded	but	whose	own	work	is	often	not	carefully	read
and	frequently	criticized	for	being	inconsistent	and	contradictory,	actually
produced	a	coherent	psychological	theory.	I	think	of	it	as	a	three-dimensional
map	that	shows	the	levels	of	the	psyche	as	well	as	the	dynamic	interrelations
among	them.	It	is	a	self-consistent	work	of	art	that	appeals	to	some	and	not	to
others.	Its	postulates	are	cast	as	scientific	propositions,	and	yet	many	of	these
are	extremely	hard	to	prove	or	disprove	empirically.	Important	work	is	going
on	in	this	area,	but	whatever	the	outcomes	may	show,	Jung’s	body	of	work
will	continue	to	attract	attention	and	admiration.	Works	of	art	never	become
outdated,	although	maps	may	lose	their	relevance	with	the	progress	of	time
and	changes	in	methodology.
To	describe	Jung’s	map	of	the	psyche	in	a	brief	book	is	not	a	completely

novel	project,	and	others,	notably	Jolande	Jacobi	and	Frieda	Fordham,	have
produced	similar	introductory	works	in	days	of	yore.	What	my	work	adds,	I
hope,	is	an	emphasis	on	the	overarching	coherence	within	the	theory	and	its
subtle	network	of	interconnections.	As	the	theory	is	often	presented,	there	is	a
bit	of	this	and	a	bit	of	that,	and	the	point	that	all	the	pieces	stem	from	a	single
unified	vision—which	I	see	as	a	sublime	vision	of	the	soul—is	not	so
obvious.	It	is	also	the	case	that	a	considerable	number	of	years	have	passed
since	these	earlier	introductions	to	Jung’s	theory	were	offered,	and	the	time	is
ripe	for	a	new	one.
My	aim	is	to	show	that	while	gaps	and	inconsistencies	do	exist	in	Jung’s
map,	there	is	a	more	profound	underlying	unity	of	vision	that	far	outweighs
the	occasional	lapses	from	logical	precision.	My	main	interest	in	this	account
is	not	to	show	the	development	of	Jung’s	thought	or	to	consider	at	any	length
its	practical	applications	in	psychotherapy	and	analysis.	It	is	rather	to	expose
the	underlying	intellectual	unity	beneath	the	welter	of	commentary	and	detail
that	constitute	his	complete	
oeuvre.
	The	careful	reader	will,	I	hope,	come
away	from	this	book	with	a	general	picture	of	the	theory	of	analytical
psychology	as	Jung	himself	expounded	it,	as	well	as	a	grasp	on	the	most
important	details	and	how	they	belong	to	a	single	whole.
The	reason	for	the	remarkable	unity	in	Jung’s	account	of	the	psyche	stems,
I	believe,	from	a	feature	of	his	thought	that	did	not	grow	out	of	his	empirical
methodology.	Jung	was	an	intuitive	creative	thinker,	after	the	fashion	of
oldtime	philosophers	like	Plato	and	Schopenhauer.	He	created	his	map	of	the
psyche	from	the	ideas	available	in	the	general	scientific	and	intellectual
community	of	his	day,	but	he	gave	these	ideas	a	unique	twist.	He	did	not
come	up	so	much	with	radical	new	notions	as	take	what	was	generally
available	and	fashion	a	new	and	highly	distinctive	pattern	out	of	it.	Like	a
great	artist	working	in	a	tradition	of	painting,	he	used	the	images	and
materials	that	were	available	to	him	and	made	something	new	which	had	not
been	seen	before	in	quite	the	same	combination	of	elements.
Jung	was	also	a	visionary	in	the	tradition	of	Meister	Eckhart,	Boehme,
Blake,	and	Emerson.	Many	of	his	most	important	intuitions	originated	in	his
experiences	of	the	sublime,	which	came	to	him	in	dreams,	visions,	and	active
imagination.	He	confesses	this	openly	in	his	autobiography,	where	he	writes
that	his	prime	teacher	about	the	“reality	of	the	psyche”	was	the	figure
Philemon,	who	first	appeared	to	him	in	a	dream	and	whom	he	then	engaged
for	years	in	active	imagination.
5
	Direct	experience	of	the	soul	is	the	ultimate
source	of	Jung’s	theory,	and	this	accounts	for	its	deep	internal	unity	and	self-
consistency.

But	Jung	was	also	a	dedicated	scientist,	and	this	sets	his	work	apart	from
the	writings	of	poets	and	mystics.	He	worked	with	the	scientific	method,
which	meant	that	he	held	his	work	accountable	to	the	scientific	community
and	subjected	it	to	empirical	tests.	His	visions,	intuitions,	and	inner
realizations	were	not	simply	allowed	to	rest	on	their	own	merit;	they	were
checked	against	the	evidence	of	human	experience	in	general.	Jung’s	strong
need	to	be	scientific	and	empirical	accounts	for	the	unbeveled	edges	in	his
theory,	for	the	rough	approximations	that	could	have	been	made	much
smoother	by	pure	intellect	and	imagination.	The	empirical	world—life	as	it	is
experienced—is	messy	and	does	not	fit	neatly	into	the	boxes	made	by	human
thought	and	imagination.	Because	Jung	was	both	a	visionary	intuitive	thinker
and	an	empirical	scientist,	his	map	of	the	human	psyche	is	both	coherent	and
yet	only	loosely	systematic	and	self-consistent.
One	reason	I	have	continued	to	appreciate	Jung’s	writings	and	have	read
him	steadily	for	over	twenty-five	years	is	that	he	is	not	compulsively
consistent.	When	I	have	studied	truly	systematic	thinkers	such	as	Tillich	or
Hegel,	I	have	always	squirmed	in	the	tight	jaws	of	their	steely	minds.	Their
thoughts	are	too	highly	
organized	for	me.	Where	is	the	messiness,	the
juiciness	of	life?	This	has	led	me	to	look	to	artists	and	poets	for	wisdom	rather
than	primarily	to	philosophers	and	theologians.	I	am	suspicious	of	rigid
systems.	They	feel	paranoid	to	me.	Jung’s	writings	have	never	affected	me	in
this	way.
Reading	Jung,	I	have	always	sensed	his	deep	respect	for	the	mysteries	of
the	human	psyche,	and	this	attitude	allows	the	horizons	to	go	on	expanding.
His	map	opens	vistas	up	rather	than	closes	them	off.	I	hope	I	will	be	able	to
communicate	this	same	impression	to	you,	the	reader.
	
This	is	an	introductory	work.	Although	I	do	hope	that	even	advanced	students
of	Jung’s	psychology	will	benefit	from	reading	it,	my	true	audience	is	those
who	would	like	to	know	what	Jung	said	but	have	not	yet	found	the	right	entry
into	his	massive	writings	and	complex	thinking.	Each	chapter	of	this	book	is
focused	on	one	theme	in	his	theory.	I	look	at	specific	passages	from	his
Collected	Works
	that	lay	out	that	piece	of	his	map.	The	especially	motivated
and	diligent	reader	can	consult	those	references	later	at	leisure.	My	text-
centered	presentation	will,	I	hope,	offer	a	friendly	invitation	to	become
immersed	in	the	primary	documents	and	to	face	the	challenge	of	teasing	out
Jung’s	sometimes	obscure	meaning	and	reflecting	upon	its	implications.

The	selection	of	these	readings	is	my	own	personal	choice.	Other	equally
valuable	texts	could	have	been	cited	and	used	just	as	well.	I	have	tried	to
choose	the	clearest	and	most	representative	essays	and	passages	from	Jung’s
work	to	demonstrate	the	essential	coherence	of	his	vision.	Jung’s	map	of	the
psyche	is	a	massive	achievement	of	intellect,	observation,	and	creative
intuition.	Few	modern	thinkers	have	come	close	to	equaling	this	towering
work,	which	is	housed	in	the	eighteen	volumes	of	the	
Collected	Works
,	the
three	volumes	of	
Letters
,	the	various	collections	of	interviews	and	occasional
writings,	and	his	autobiography	(written	with	Aniela	Jaffe).	From	this
mountain	of	material	I	have	selected	the	topics	that	belong	most	essentially	to
his	theory	and	have	left	out	those	that	have	to	do	with	analytical	practice	and
interpretation	of	culture,	history,	and	religion.
I	come	back	to	the	question	I	asked	before:	Is	there	really	a	system	in
Jung’s	works?	Is	he	a	systematic	thinker?	The	answer	is	probably	a	guarded
yes.	The	theory	is	coherent,	in	the	same	way	that	Switzerland	is	a	coherent
country	although	the	population	speaks	four	different	languages.	The	whole
hangs	together	even	though	the	parts	look	as	if	they	could	stand	alone	and
function	quite	independently.	Jung	did	not	think	systematically	in	the	way	a
philosopher	does,	building	on	basic	premises	and	making	certain	that	the	parts
fit	together	without	contradiction.	He	claimed	to	be	an	empirical	scientist,	and
so	his	theorizing	matches	the	disorderliness	of	the	empirical	world.	An
intuitive	thinker,	Jung	lays	out	big	concepts,	elaborates	them	in	some	detail,
and	then	proceeds	to	other	big	concepts.	He	backtracks	frequently,	repeats
himself,	and	fills	in	gaps	as	he	goes	along.	This	quality	makes	for	difficulty	in
reading	him.	One	has	to	know	all	of	his	work	in	order	to	get	the	picture.	If
you	read	more	or	less	randomly	in	his	works	for	a	while,	you	begin	to	suspect
that	the	pieces	fit	together	somehow	in	Jung’s	own	mind,	but	only	after
reading	his	whole	work	and	considering	it	for	a	long	time	can	you	see	how
they	really	do.
I	think	Jung	felt	that,	having	become	aware	of	the	profundity	and	far
reaches	of	the	human	psyche	through	his	clinical	work	and	his	own
experience,	he	had	to	work	patiently	over	a	considerable	length	of	time	in
order	to	formulate	responsibly	this	sublime	vision	of	the	human	soul.	He
would	not	rush	it,	and	often	he	delayed	publishing	for	years	while	he	worked
at	building	the	structures	that	could	support	his	thought	in	the	intellectual
community.	As	we	try	to	grasp	this	vision	in	its	full	magnitude,	we	need	to
bear	in	mind	that	he	elaborated	it	over	a	period	of	some	sixty	years.	We
should	not	be	overly	obsessed	with	exact	consistency	in	a	work	this	large	and
in	one	that	is	attuned	to	empirical	reality.

A	story	is	told	of	Jung	by	his	students	in	Zurich.	Once	when	he	was
criticized	for	being	inconsistent	on	some	point	of	theory,	he	responded:	I	have
my	eye	on	the	central	fire,	and	I	am	trying	to	put	some	mirrors	around	it	to
show	it	to	others.	Sometimes	the	edges	of	those	mirrors	leave	gaps	and	don’t
fit	together	exactly.	I	can’t	help	that.	Look	at	what	I’m	trying	to	point	to!
I	take	it	as	my	task	to	describe	as	accurately	as	possible	what	Jung	shows	in
these	mirrors.	It	is	a	vision	that	has	sustained	many	people	in	our	generation
and	may	be	a	vision	for	the	foreseeable	future.	Above	all,	his	writings	provide
us	with	images	of	a	great	mystery,	the	human	psyche.

1
Surface:
(Ego-Conconscious)
I	will	begin	unrolling	Jung’s	map	of	the	psyche	by	looking	at	his	description
of	human	consciousness	and	its	most	central	feature,	the	
ego
.	“Ego”	is	a
technical	term	whose	origin	is	the	Latin	word	meaning	“I.”	Consciousness	is
the	state	of	awakeness,	and	at	its	center	there	is	an	“I.”	This	is	an	obvious
starting	point,	and	it	is	the	entrance	to	the	vast	inner	space	that	we	call	the
psyche.	It	is	also	a	complex	feature	of	the	psyche,	one	that	still	holds	many
puzzles	and	unanswered	questions.
Although	Jung	was	more	interested	in	discovering	what	lay	beneath
consciousness	in	the	hinterlands	of	the	psyche,	he	also	took	on	the	task	of
describing	and	explaining	human	consciousness.	He	wanted	to	create	a
complete	map	of	the	psyche,	so	this	was	unavoidable:	ego-consciousness	is	a
prime	feature	of	the	territory	he	was	exploring.	Jung	cannot	really	be	called
an	ego	psychologist,	but	he	did	place	a	social	value	on	the	ego.	He	offered	an
account	of	the	ego’s	functions,	and	he	recognized	the	critical	importance	of
greater	consciousness	for	the	future	of	human	life	and	for	culture.	Moreover,
he	was	acutely	aware	that	ego-consciousness	is	itself	the	prerequisite	for
psychological	investigation.	It	is	the	tool.	Our	knowledge	as	human	beings
about	anything	
at	all	is	conditioned	by	the	capacities	and	limitations	of	our
consciousness.	To	study	consciousness,	therefore,	is	to	direct	attention	to	the
instrument	that	one	is	using	for	psychological	investigation	and	exploration.
Why	is	it	so	important,	especially	in	psychology,	to	understand	the	nature
of	ego-consciousness?	It	is	because	one	needs	to	make	adjustments	for
distortion.	Jung	said	that	every	psychology	is	a	personal	confession.
1
	Every
creative	psychologist	is	limited	by	his	or	her	own	personal	biases	and
unexamined	assumptions.	Not	all	that	seems	true	to	even	the	most	earnest	and

sincere	investigator’s	consciousness	is	necessarily	accurate	knowledge.	Much
that	passes	for	knowledge	among	human	beings	is	actually,	upon	closer	and
more	critical	inspection,	merely	prejudice	or	belief	based	on	distortion,	bias,
hearsay,	speculation,	or	pure	fantasy.	Beliefs	pass	as	knowledge	and	are	clung
to	as	reliable	certainties.	“I	believe	in	order	that	I	may	understand,”	a	famous
remark	from	St.	Augustine,	may	sound	strange	to	our	modern	ears	today,	and
yet	this	is	often	the	case	when	people	begin	to	speak	about	psychological
reality.	Jung	seriously	sought	to	examine	the	foundations	of	his	own	thinking
by	critically	examining	the	instrument	he	was	using	to	make	his	discoveries.
He	argued	strongly	that	a	critical	understanding	of	consciousness	is	essential
for	science,	just	as	it	has	been	for	philosophy.	Accurate	understanding	of	the
psyche,	or	of	anything	else	for	that	matter,	depends	upon	the	state	of	one’s
consciousness.	Jung	wanted	to	offer	a	critical	understanding	of	consciousness.
This	was	his	primary	objective	in	writing	the	key	work,	
Psychological	Types
,
which	describes	eight	cognitive	styles	that	distinguish	human	consciousness
and	process	information	and	life	experience	differently.
The	Relation	of	Ego	to	Consciousness
Jung	therefore	writes	a	great	deal	about	ego-consciousness	throughout	his
published	works.	For	my	purposes	here,	I	will	discuss	primarily	the	first
chapter	of	the	late	work	
Aion,
	entitled	“The	Ego,”	as	well	as	some	related
texts	and	passages.	These	summarize	his	position	adequately	and	represent	his
mature	thinking	on	
the	subject.	At	the	end	of	this	chapter	I	will	also	include
some	references	to	
Psychological	Types
.
Aion
	can	be	read	on	many	different	levels.	It	is	a	work	of	Jung’s	later	years
and	reflects	his	profound	engagement	with	Western	intellectual	and	religious
history	and	their	future,	as	well	his	most	detailed	thoughts	about	the	archetype
of	the	self.	The	first	four	chapters	were	added	to	the	book	later	to	provide	the
new	reader	with	an	introduction	to	his	general	psychological	theory	and	to
offer	an	entry	point	into	the	vocabulary	of	analytical	psychology.	While	these
introductory	pages	are	not	detailed	or	particularly	technical,	they	do	contain
Jung’s	most	condensed	discussions	about	the	psychic	structures	called	ego,
shadow,	anima,	animus,	and	self.
Here	Jung	defines	the	ego	as	follows:	“It	forms,	as	it	were,	the	centre	of	the
field	of	consciousness;	and,	in	so	far	as	this	comprises	the	empirical
personality,	the	ego	is	the	subject	of	all	personal	acts	of	consciousness.”
2

Consciousness	is	a	“field,”	and	what	Jung	calls	the	“empirical	personality”
here	is	our	personality	as	we	are	aware	of	it	and	experience	it	firsthand.	The
ego,	as	“the	subject	of	all	personal	acts	of	consciousness,”	occupies	the	center
of	this	field.	The	term	ego	refers	to	one’s	experience	of	oneself	as	a	center	of
willing,	desiring,	reflecting,	and	acting.	This	definition	of	the	ego	as	the
center	of	consciousness	is	consistent	throughout	all	of	Jung’s	writings.
Jung	continues	this	text	by	commenting	on	the	function	of	the	ego	within
the	psyche:	“The	relation	of	a	psychic	content	to	the	ego	forms	the	criterion	of
its	consciousness,	for	no	content	can	be	conscious	unless	it	is	represented	to	a
subject.”
3
	The	ego	is	a	“subject”	to	whom	psychic	contents	are	“represented.”
It	is	like	a	mirror.	Moreover,	a	connection	to	the	ego	is	the	necessary
condition	for	making	anything	conscious—a	feeling,	a	thought,	a	perception,
or	a	fantasy.	The	ego	is	a	kind	of	mirror	in	which	the	psyche	can	see	itself	and
can	become	aware.	The	degree	to	which	a	psychic	content	is	taken	up	and
reflected	by	the	ego	is	the	degree	to	which	it	can	be	said	to	belong	to	the
realm	of	consciousness.	When	a	psychic	content	is	only	vaguely	or
marginally	conscious,	it	has	not	yet	been	captured	and	held	it	in	place	upon
the	ego’s	reflective	surface.
In	the	passages	that	follow	this	definition	of	the	ego,	Jung	makes	a	crucial
distinction	between	conscious	and	unconscious	features	of	the	psyche:
consciousness	is	what	we	know,	and	unconsciousness	is	all	that	we	do	not
know.	In	another	text,	written	at	about	the	same	time,	he	makes	this	a	little
more	precise:	“The	unconscious	is	not	simply	the	unknown,	it	is	rather	the
unknown	psychic;
	and	this	we	define	…	as	all	those	things	in	us	which,	if	they
came	to	consciousness,	would	presumably	differ	in	no	respect	from	the
known	psychic	contents.”
4
	The	distinction	between	conscious	and
unconscious,	so	fundamental	in	Jung’s	general	theory	of	the	psyche,	as	it	is	in
all	of	depth	psychology,	posits	that	some	contents	are	reflected	by	the	ego	and
held	in	consciousness,	where	they	can	be	further	examined	and	manipulated,
while	other	psychic	contents	lie	outside	of	consciousness	either	temporarily	or
permanently.	The	unconscious	includes	all	psychic	contents	that	lie	outside	of
consciousness,	for	whatever	reason	or	whatever	duration.	Actually,	this	is	the
vast	bulk	of	the	psychic	world.	The	unconscious	was	the	major	area	of
investigation	in	depth	psychology,	and	Jung’s	most	passionate	interest	lay	in
exploring	that	territory.	But	more	of	that	later.
Often	in	his	writings	Jung	refers	to	the	ego	as	a	“complex,”	a	term	that	will
be	discussed	extensively	in	the	next	chapter.	In	the	
Aion
	passage,	however,	he
simply	calls	it	a	specific	content	of	consciousness,	stating	by	this	that
consciousness	is	a	broader	category	than	the	ego	and	contains	more	than	only

the	ego.
What	is	consciousness	itself,	this	field	in	which	the	ego	is	located	and
where	it	occupies	and	defines	the	center?	Most	simply,	consciousness	is
awareness.	It	is	the	state	of	being	awake,	of	observing	and	registering	what	is
going	on	in	the	world	around	and	within.	Humans	are	not,	of	course,	the	only
conscious	beings	on	earth.	Other	animals	are	conscious	as	well,	since
obviously	they	can	observe	and	react	to	their	environments	in	carefully
modulated	ways.	Plants’	sensitivity	to	their	environment	can	also	be	taken	as
a	form	of	consciousness.	By	itself,	consciousness	does	not	set	the	human
species	apart	from	other	forms	of	life.	Nor	is	consciousness	something	that
sets	human	adults	apart	from	infants	and	children.	In	the	strictest	sense,
human	consciousness	
does	not	depend	for	its	essential	quality	upon	age	or
psychological	development	at	all.	A	friend	who	observed	the	birth	of	his
daughter	told	me	how	moved	he	was	when,	after	the	placenta	was	removed
and	her	eyes	were	cleaned,	she	opened	them	and	looked	around	the	room,
taking	it	in.	Obviously	this	was	a	sign	of	consciousness.	The	eye	is	an
indicator	of	the	presence	of	consciousness.	Its	aliveness	and	movement	is	the
signal	that	an	aware	being	is	observing	the	world.	Consciousness	depends	not
only	on	sight,	of	course,	but	on	the	other	senses	as	well.	In	the	womb,	before
the	infant’s	eyes	are	functioning	to	see,	it	registers	sounds,	reacts	to	voices
and	to	music,	and	indicates	a	remarkable	degree	of	responsiveness.	We	do	not
yet	know	exactly	when	the	embryo	first	attains	a	level	of	awareness	and
reactiveness	that	could	definitely	be	called	conscious,	but	it	is	early	and	it	is
certainly	in	the	prenatal	period.
The	opposite	of	consciousness	is	deep	dreamless	sleep,	the	total	lack	of
responsiveness	and	sentient	awareness.	And	the	permanent	absence	of
consciousness	from	a	body	is	practically	a	definition	of	death,	except	in	cases
of	longterm	coma.	Consciousness,	even	if	it	is	only	the	potential	for	future
consciousness,	is	the	“life	factor”;	it	belongs	to	living	bodies.
What	development	does	to	consciousness	is	add	specific	content.	In	theory,
human	consciousness	can	be	separated	from	its	contents—the	thoughts,
memories,	identity,	fantasies,	emotions,	images,	and	words	that	crowd	its
space.	But	in	practice	this	is	almost	impossible.	In	fact,	only	advanced
spiritual	adepts	seem	able	to	make	this	distinction	convincingly.	It	is	truly	a
sage	who	can	separate	consciousness	from	its	contents	and	keep	them	apart,
whose	consciousness	is	not	defined	by	identifications	with	selected	thoughts
and	images.	For	most	people,	consciousness	without	a	stable	object	to	ground
it	seems	to	be	an	exceedingly	ephemeral	and	transient	thing.	The
substantiality	of	consciousness	and	the	feeling	of	solidity	are	typically

provided	by	stable	objects	and	contents	such	as	images,	memories,	and
thoughts.	Substance	and	continuity	in	consciousness	are	made	of	these.	Yet,
as	evidence	from	stroke	victims	attests,	the	contents	and	even	the	ego
functions	of	consciousness—thinking,	remembering,	naming	
and	speaking,
recognizing	familiar	images	and	persons	and	faces—are	actually	more
transient	and	fragile	than	is	consciousness	itself.	It	is	possible	to	lose	one’s
memory	entirely,	for	example,	and	still	be	conscious.	Consciousness	is	like	a
room	that	surrounds	the	psychic	contents	that	temporarily	fill	it.	And
consciousness	precedes	the	ego,	which	becomes	its	eventual	center.
The	ego,	like	consciousness,	also	transcends	and	outlasts	the	particular
contents	that	occupy	the	room	of	consciousness	at	any	particular	moment.
The	ego	is	a	focal	point	within	consciousness,	its	most	central	and	perhaps
most	permanent	feature.	Against	the	opinion	of	the	East,	Jung	argues	that
without	an	ego,	consciousness	itself	becomes	questionable.	But	it	is	true	that
certain	ego	functions	can	be	suspended	or	seemingly	obliterated	without
destroying	consciousness	completely,	and	so	a	sort	of	ego-less	consciousness,
a	type	of	consciousness	that	shows	very	little	evidence	of	a	willful	center,	an
“I,”	is	a	human	possibility	at	least	for	short	periods	of	time.
For	Jung,	the	ego	forms	the	critical	center	of	consciousness	and	in	fact
determines	to	a	large	extent	which	contents	remain	within	the	realm	of
consciousness	and	which	ones	drop	away	into	the	unconscious.	The	ego	is
responsible	for	retaining	contents	in	consciousness,	and	it	can	also	eliminate
contents	from	consciousness	by	ceasing	to	reflect	them.	To	use	Freud’s	term,
which	Jung	found	useful,	the	ego	can	“repress”	contents	it	does	not	like	or
finds	intolerably	painful	or	incompatible	with	other	contents.	It	can	also
retrieve	contents	from	storage	in	the	unconscious	(i.e.,	from	the	memory
bank)	so	long	as	(a)	they	are	not	blocked	by	defense	mechanisms,	such	as
repression,	which	keep	intolerable	conflicts	out	of	reach,	and	(b)	they	have	a
strong	enough	associative	connection	to	the	ego—they	are	“learned”	strongly
enough.
The	ego	is	not	fundamentally	constituted	and	defined	by	the	acquired
contents	of	consciousness	such	as	momentary	or	even	chronic	identifications.
It	is	like	a	mirror	or	magnet	that	holds	contents	in	a	focal	point	of	awareness.
But	it	also	wills	and	acts.	As	the	vital	center	of	consciousness,	it	precedes	the
acquisition	of	language,	personal	identity,	and	even	awareness	of	a	personal
name.	Later	acquisitions	of	the	ego,	such	as	recognition	of	one’s	
own	face	and
name,	are	contents	that	cluster	closely	around	this	center	of	consciousness,
and	they	have	the	effect	of	defining	the	ego	and	enlarging	its	range	of
executive	command	and	self-awareness.	Fundamentally,	the	ego	is	a	virtual

center	of	awareness	that	exists	at	least	from	birth,	the	eye	that	sees	and	has
always	seen	the	world	from	this	vantage	point,	from	this	body,	from	this
individual	point	of	view.	In	itself	it	is	nothing,	that	is,	not	a	thing.	It	is
therefore	highly	elusive	and	impossible	to	pin	down.	One	can	even	deny	that
it	exists	at	all.	And	yet	it	is	always	present.	It	is	not	the	product	of	nurture,
growth,	or	development.	It	is	innate.	While	it	can	be	shown	to	develop	and
gain	strength	from	this	point	onward	through	“collisions”	with	reality	(see
below),	its	core	is	“given.”	It	comes	with	the	infant.
As	Jung	describes	the	psyche,	there	is	a	network	of	associations	among	the
various	contents	of	consciousness.	All	of	them	are	linked	directly	or	indirectly
to	the	central	agency,	the	ego.	The	ego	is	the	center	of	consciousness	not	only
geographically	but	also	dynamically.	It	is	the	energy	center	that	moves	the
contents	of	consciousness	around	and	arranges	them	in	orders	of	priority.	The
ego	is	the	locus	of	decisionmaking	and	free	will.	When	I	say,	“I	am	going	to
the	post	office,”	my	ego	has	made	a	decision	and	mobilizes	the	physical	and
emotional	energy	necessary	to	do	the	job.	The	ego	directs	me	to	the	post
office	and	gets	me	there.	It	is	the	executive	who	sets	the	priorities:	“Go	to	the
post	office,	don’t	get	distracted	by	your	wish	to	go	for	a	stroll	in	the	park.”
While	the	ego	can	be	regarded	as	the	center	of	selfishness	(
ego
-ism),	it	is	also
the	center	of	altruism.	In	and	of	itself,	the	ego,	as	Jung	understood	and
described	it,	is	morally	neutral,	not	a	“bad	thing”	as	one	hears	it	referred	to	in
common	parlance	(“oh,	he’s	got	such	an	ego!”)	but	a	necessary	part	of	human
psychological	life.	The	ego	is	what	sets	humans	apart	from	other	creatures	of
nature	who	also	possess	consciousness;	it	also	sets	the	individual	human
being	apart	from	other	human	beings.	It	is	the	individualizing	agent	in	human
consciousness.
The	ego	focuses	human	consciousness	and	gives	our	conscious	behavior	its
purposefulness	and	direction.	Because	we	have	an	ego,	we	possess	the
freedom	to	make	choices	that	may	defy	our	
instincts	for	self-preservation,
propagation,	and	creativity.	The	ego	contains	our	capacity	to	master	large
amounts	of	material	within	consciousness	and	to	manipulate	them.	It	is	a
powerful	associative	magnet	and	an	organizational	agent.	Because	humans
have	such	a	force	at	the	center	of	consciousness,	they	are	able	to	integrate	and
direct	large	quantities	of	data.	A	strong	ego	is	one	that	can	obtain	and	move
around	in	a	deliberate	way	large	amounts	of	conscious	content.	A	weak	ego
cannot	do	very	much	of	this	kind	of	work	and	more	easily	succumbs	to
impulses	and	emotional	reactions.	A	weak	ego	is	easily	distracted,	and	as	a
result	consciousness	lacks	focus	and	consistent	motivation.
It	is	possible	for	humans	to	remain	conscious	while	suspending	much	of

normal	ego	functioning.	By	will	we	can	direct	ourselves	to	be	passive	and
inactive	and	simply	to	observe	the	world	within	or	without,	like	a	camera.
Normally,	though,	it	is	not	possible	to	maintain	a	volitionally	restrained
observational	consciousness	for	a	great	length	of	time,	because	the	ego	and
the	wider	psyche	usually	become	quickly	engaged	by	what	is	being	observed.
When	we	watch	a	movie,	for	example,	we	may	begin	by	simply	observing
and	taking	in	the	people	and	scenery.	But	we	soon	begin	to	identify	with	one
character	or	another,	and	our	emotions	become	activated.	The	ego	readies
itself	to	act,	and	if	one	has	difficulty	distinguishing	between	movie	images
and	reality	(another	ego	function)	one	may	be	tempted	to	engage	in	physical
behavior.	The	body	then	becomes	mobilized,	and	the	ego	aims	at	and	intends
a	particular	course	of	action.	Indeed,	movies	are	structured	so	that	viewers
will	take	sides	emotionally	and	support	whatever	a	particular	character	is
doing	or	feeling.	Engaged	in	this	way,	the	ego	becomes	activated	as	a	center
of	wishing,	hoping,	and	perhaps	even	intending.	It	is	conceivable	that	one
would	make	a	major	life	decision	while	watching	a	movie	as	a	consequence
of	the	feelings	and	thoughts	generated	in	consciousness	by	these	images.
People	have	been	known	to	leave	a	movie	theater	and	become	violent	or
lustful	as	a	direct	result	of	the	impact	of	the	movie.	The	ego	has	become
enlisted	by	emotion,	identification,	and	desire,	and	uses	its	directive	function
and	energy	to	act.
As	becomes	evident,	the	ego’s	freedom	is	limited.	It	is	easily	influenced	by
both	internal	psychic	and	external	environmental	stimuli.	The	ego	may
respond	to	a	threatening	stimulus	by	taking	up	arms	and	defending	itself;	or	it
may	be	activated	and	stimulated	by	an	interior	urge	to	create,	or	to	love,	or	to
seek	revenge.	It	may	also	respond	to	an	ego	impulse—that	is,	narcissistically.
It	may	in	this	way	be	seized	by	a	need	for	revenge,	for	example.
Waking	consciousness	is	focused,	then,	by	the	ego’s	registering	of	internal
and	environmental	stimuli	and	phenomena	and	putting	the	body	into	motion.
The	origins	of	the	ego,	to	say	it	again,	extend	back	before	earliest	childhood
and	infancy.	Even	a	very	young	infant	notices	shapes	in	its	environment,
some	of	which	seem	pleasurable,	and	it	reaches	out	for	them.	These	very	early
signals	of	an	organism’s	intentionality	are	evidence	for	the	primordial	roots	of
the	ego,	one’s	“I-ness.”
Reflecting	on	the	nature	and	essence	of	this	“I”	leads	to	profound
psychological	questions.	What	is	the	ego	fundamentally?	What	am	I?	Jung
would	simply	say	that	the	ego	is	the	center	of	consciousness.
The	“I”	feels,	perhaps	naively,	that	it	has	existed	forever.	Even	notions	of

earlier	lifetimes	sometimes	take	on	a	feeling	of	truth	and	reality.	It	is	an	open
question	whether	the	“I”	changes	essentially	in	the	course	of	a	lifetime.	Is	not
the	“I”	that	cried	for	mother	at	two	the	same	one	that	cries	for	a	lost	love	at
forty-five	or	over	a	lost	spouse	at	eighty?	While	many	features	of	the	ego
clearly	do	develop	and	change,	particularly	with	regard	to	cognition,	self-
knowledge,	psychosocial	identity,	competence,	etc.,	one	also	senses	an
important	continuity	at	the	heart	of	the	ego.	Many	people	have	been	moved	to
find	the	“child	within.”	This	is	nothing	less	than	the	recognition	that	the
person	I	was	as	a	child	is	the	same	person	I	am	as	an	adult.	Probably	the
essential	core	of	the	ego	does	not	change	over	a	lifetime.	This	could	also
possibly	account	for	the	strong	intuition	and	conviction	of	many	people	that
this	core	of	the	ego	does	not	disappear	with	one’s	physical	death	but	either
goes	to	a	place	of	eternal	rest	(heaven,	nirvana)	or	is	reborn	in	another	life	on
the	physical	plane	(reincarnation).
A	child	first	says	“I”	at	about	two.	Until	then	it	refers	to	itself	in	the	third
person	or	by	name:	“Timmie	want”	or	“Sarah	go.”	When	a	child	is	able	to	say
“I”	and	to	think	self-referentially,	placing	itself	consciously	at	the	center	of	a
personal	world	and	giving	that	position	a	specific	first-person	pronoun,	it	has
made	a	great	leap	forward	in	consciousness.	But	this	is	by	no	means	the	birth
of	the	primordial	ego.	Long	before	this,	consciousness	and	behavior	have
been	organized	around	a	virtual	center.	The	ego	clearly	exists	before	one	can
refer	to	it	consciously	and	reflectively,	and	the	process	of	coming	to	know	it	is
gradual	and	continues	throughout	a	lifetime.	Growing	into	self-consciousness
is	a	process	that	passes	through	many	stages	from	infancy	to	adulthood.	One
of	these	Jung	describes	in	some	detail	in	
Memories,	Dreams,	Reflections,
when	he	speaks	of	walking	out	of	a	cloud	at	about	the	age	of	thirteen	and
realizing	for	the	first	time:	“Now	I	am	myself.”
5
By	virtue	of	this	capacity	to	achieve	a	high	level	of	self-knowledge	and
self-awareness-that	is,	a	self-reflective	ego—human	consciousness	differs
from	animal	consciousness,	at	least	so	far	as	we	presently	know.	This
difference	is	attributable	not	only	to	human	verbal	capacity,	which	gives	us
the	ability	to	talk	about	the	“I”	that	we	know	we	are	and	thereby	to	enrich	its
complexity,	but	to	the	sheer	self-mirroring	function	present	in	human
consciousness.	This	function	is	prelinguistic	and	postlinguistic.	It	is	knowing
that	one	is	(and	later,	that	one	will	die).	By	virtue	of	having	an	ego—this
built-in	mirror	within	consciousness—we	can	know	that	we	are	and	what	we
are.	Other	animal	species	also	clearly	want	to	live	and	to	control	their
environments,	and	they	show	evidence	of	emotion	and	consciousness	as	well
as	intentionality,	reality	testing,	self-control,	and	much	else	that	we	associate

with	an	ego	function.	But	animals	do	not	have,	or	have	much	less	of,	this	self-
mirroring	function	within	consciousness.	They	have	less	of	an	ego.	Do	they
know	that	they	are,	that	they	will	individually	die,	that	they	are	separate
individuals?	It	is	doubtful.	The	poet	Rilke	held	that	animals	do	not	face	death
the	way	humans	do,	and	that	gives	them	the	advantage	of	living	more	fully	in
the	present	moment.	Animals	are	not	self-conscious	in	the	same	way	that
humans	are,	and	without	language	they	cannot	express	whatever	self-
consciousness	they	do	have	with	any	degree	of	sophistication	nor	differentiate
themselves	from	others	with	the	kind	of	linguistic	tools	humans	possess.
6
After	a	certain	point	in	development,	the	human	ego	and	human
consciousness	become	largely	defined	and	shaped	by	the	cultural	world	in
which	a	person	grows	up	and	becomes	educated.	This	is	a	layer,	or	wrapping,
of	ego	structure	that	surrounds	the	central	ego.	As	a	child	grows	into	a	culture
and	learns	its	forms	and	habits	through	family	interactions	and	educational
experiences	in	school,	this	ego	wrapping	becomes	thicker	and	thicker.	Jung
refers	to	these	two	features	of	the	ego	as	“Personality	No.	1”	and	“Personality
No.	2.”
7
	Personality	No.	2	is	the	innate	core	ego,	and	Personality	No.	1	is	the
culturally	acquired	layer	of	the	ego	that	grows	up	over	time.
Some	specific	contents	of	a	person’s	ego-consciousness	can	show	a	great
deal	of	stability	over	time.	One’s	own	name	is	ordinarily	a	stable	feature	of
consciousness.	It	may	even	seem	after	a	certain	point	to	be	permanently
welded	to	the	ego.	While	a	name	is	an	impersonal	handle	and	belongs	to	the
public	arena	as	part	of	one’s	
persona
	(see	chaper	5),	when	it	is	spoken	by	a
parent	or	a	child	or	a	lover	it	touches	our	most	intimate	places	of	self-feeling.
Yet	it	must	still	be	recognized	that	a	name	is	a	cultural	artifact	and	as	such	is
less	securely	fixed	to	the	ego	than	is,	for	instance,	the	body.	People	have
changed	their	names	and	remained	the	same	people.	So	far	no	one	has
changed	complete	bodies	to	see	if	this	is	still	the	case;	if	(or	when)	this	comes
to	pass,	we	will	find	out	if	the	ego	also	transcends	the	body.	I	suspect	the
answer	will	be	that	it	does	indeed	transcend	the	body,	even	though	its	relation
to	the	body	seems	to	us	so	completely	fused.
One	might	be	tempted	to	define	the	ego	as	the	body’s	consciousness	of
itself	as	a	willing,	individual,	limited,	unique	entity.	If	one	had	been	named
differently,	it	could	be	argued,	one’s	essential	“I”	would	not	be	different	than
it	is.	But	if	one	had	a	different	body,	would	the	ego	be	essentially	other?	The
ego	is	deeply	rooted	in	a	body,	more	so	even	than	it	is	in	culture,	but	just	how
deep	this	connection	goes	is	open	to	debate.	Nevertheless,	the	ego	is
profoundly	fearful	of	the	body’s	death.	It	is	a	fear	that	the	ego’s	extinction
will	follow	upon	the	body’s	demise.	According	to	Jung,	however,	the	ego	is

not	strictly	limited	to	the	somatic	base.	In	Aion	he	states	that	the	ego	“is	not	a
simple	or	elementary	factor,	but	a	complex	one,	which	as	such,	cannot	be
described	exhaustively.	Experience	shows	that	it	rests	on	two	seemingly
different	bases,	the	somatic	and	the	psychic.”
8
In	Jung’s	thinking,	the	psyche	cannot	be	reduced	to	a	mere	expression	of
the	body,	the	result	of	brain	chemistry	or	some	such	physical	process.	For	the
psyche	also	partakes	of	mind	or	spirit	(the	Greek	word	
nous
	captures	best
Jung’s	thinking	on	this	point),	and	as	such	it	can	and	occasionally	does
transcend	its	physical	location.	In	later	chapters,	we	shall	see	more	precisely
how	Jung	derives	psyche	from	a	combination	of	physical	nature	and
transcendent	spirit	or	mind,	
nous
.	But,	for	now,	it	is	sufficient	to	note	that
psyche	and	body	are	not	coterminous,	nor	is	the	one	derived	from	the	other.
The	ego,	too,	which	is	predominantly	treated	by	Jung	as	a	completely	psychic
object,	rests	only	partially	on	a	somatic	base.	The	ego	is	based	in	the	body
only	in	the	sense	that	it	experiences	unity	with	the	body,	but	the	body	that	the
ego	experiences	is	psychic.	It	is	a	body	image.	and	not	the	body	itself.	The
body	is	experienced	“from	the	totality	of	endosomatic	perceptions,”	
9
	that	is,
from	what	one	can	consciously	feel	of	the	body.	These	percepts	of	the	body
“are	produced	by	endosomatic	stimuli,	only	some	of	which	cross	the
threshold	of	consciousness.	A	considerable	proportion	of	these	stimuli	occur
unconsciously,	that	is,	subliminally	…	The	fact	that	they	are	subliminal	does
not	necessarily	mean	that	their	status	is	merely	physiological,	any	more	than
this	would	be	true	of	a	psychic	content.	Sometimes	they	are	capable	of
crossing	the	threshold,	that	is,	of	becoming	perceptions.	But	there	is	no	doubt
that	a	large	proportion	of	these	endosomatic	stimuli	are	simply	incapable	of
consciousness	and	are	so	elementary	that	there	is	no	reason	to	assign	them	a
psychic	nature.”
10
In	this	passage,	we	observe	how	Jung	draws	the	line	on	the	psyche’s
boundary	to	include	ego-consciousness	and	the	unconscious	but	not	the
somatic	base	as	such.	Many	physiological	
processes	never	pass	over	into	the
psyche,	even	into	the	
unconscious
	
psyche.	In	principle,	they	are	incapable	of
ever	becoming	conscious.	It	is	evident	that	the	sympathetic	nervous	system,
for	instance,	is	for	the	most	part	not	accessible	to	consciousness.	As	the	heart
beats,	blood	circulates,	and	neurons	fire,	some	but	not	all	somatic	processes
can	become	conscious.	It	is	not	clear	just	how	far	the	ego’s	capacity	to
penetrate	into	the	somatic	base	can	be	developed.	Trained	yogis	claim	to	be
able	to	exercise	very	large	control	over	somatic	processes.	They	have	been
known	to	will	their	deaths,	for	example,	and	to	have	simply	stopped	their
hearts	at	will.	One	yogi’s	ability	to	change	the	surface	temperature	in	the	palm

of	his	hand	by	will	was	tested	and	verified:	he	could	willfully	alter	it	by	ten	or
twenty	degrees.	This	demonstrates	a	considerable	psychic	capacity	to
penetrate	and	control	the	body,	but	it	still	leaves	much	territory	untouched.
How	far	down	into	the	cellular	substructure	can	the	ego	penetrate?	Can	a
trained	ego	shrink	a	cancerous	tumor,	for	example,	or	effectively	overcome
hypertension?	Many	questions	remain.
One	should	keep	in	mind	that	there	are	two	thresholds:	the	first	separates
consciousness	from	the	unconscious,	the	second	separates	the	psyche	(both
conscious	and	unconscious)	from	the	somatic	base.	I	will	discuss	these
thresholds	in	greater	detail	in	later	chapters,	but	for	now	it	should	be	noted
that	they	are	broad	thresholds	and	should	be	conceived	of	as	fluid	boundaries,
not	fixed	and	rigid	barriers.	The	psyche	is,	for	Jung,	inclusive	of	both
consciousness	and	the	unconscious,	but	it	does	not	include	all	of	the	body	in
its	purely	physiological	dimension.	The	ego,	Jung	holds,	rests	on	the	
psychic
soma,	that	is,	on	a	body	image,	and	not	on	the	body	per	se.	The	ego	is
therefore	essentially	a	psychic	factor.
The	Location	of	the	Ego
The	whole	territory	of	the	psyche	is	very	nearly	coterminous	with	the
potential	range	of	the	ego.	The	psyche,	as	Jung	defines	it	in	this	passage,	is
bounded	by	and	limited	to	where	the	ego	can	in	principle	go.	This	does	not
mean	that	psyche	and	ego	are	
identical,	however,	since	the	psyche	includes
the	unconscious	and	the	ego	is	more	or	less	limited	to	consciousness.	But	the
unconscious	is	at	least	potentially	available	to	the	ego,	even	if	the	ego	does
not	ever	actually	experience	much	of	it.	The	point	here	is	that	the	psyche	itself
has	a	limit,	and	that	limit	is	the	point	at	which	stimuli	or	extrapsychic	contents
can	no	longer,	in	principle,	
ever
	be	experienced	consciously.	In	Kantian
philosophy,	which	Jung	followed,	this	nonexperiencable	entity	is	called	the
Ding	an	sich
,	the	“thing	in	itself.”	Human	experience	is	limited.	The	psyche	is
limited.	Jung	was	not	a	pan-psychist,	that	is,	someone	who	claims	that	the
psyche	is	everywhere	and	makes	up	everything.	The	body	lies	outside	of	the
psyche,	and	the	world	is	far	greater	than	the	psyche.
We	should	avoid	imposing	too	much	precision	on	Jung’s	use	of
terminology,	however,	particularly	on	terms	like	
psyche
	and	
unconscious
.
Otherwise	we	will	create	tight	fits	where	Jung	deliberately	left	gaps	and
openings.	Psyche	is	not	
precisely
	co-extensive	with	the	combined	territory

conscious-and-unconscious,	nor	is	it	
exactly
	limited	to	the	range	of	the	ego.
At	the	edges,	where	psyche	and	soma	come	together	and	where	psyche	and
world	meet,	there	are	shadings	of	“inside/outside.”	These	gray	areas	Jung
calls	
psychoid
	
.	This	is	an	area	that	behaves	in	a	psyche-like	way	but	is	not
altogether	psychic.	It	is	quasi-psychic.	In	these	gray	areas	lie	psychosomatic
puzzles,	for	example.	How	do	mind	and	body	influence	each	other?	Where
does	one	leave	off	and	the	other	begin?	These	questions	have	still	not	been
answered.
Jung	draws	these	subtle	distinctions	in	the	
Aion
	passage,	where	he
describes	the	psychic	base	of	the	ego	this	way:	“on	the	one	hand	the	ego	rests
on	the	total	field	of	consciousness,	and	on	the	other,	on	the	sum	total	of
unconscious	contents.	These	fall	into	three	groups:	first,	temporarily
subliminal	contents	that	can	be	reproduced	voluntarily	(memory)	…	second,
unconscious	contents	that	cannot	be	reproduced	voluntarily	…	third,	contents
that	are	not	capable	of	becoming	conscious	at	all.”
11
	This	third	group	should,
by	earlier	definitions,	be	left	outside	of	the	psyche,	and	yet	Jung	here	places	it
inside	the	unconscious.	Evidently	he	saw	that	the	unconscious	reaches	a	place
where	it	is	no	longer	psyche	and	extends	into	nonpsychic	regions,	that	is,	into
the	
“world”	beyond	the	psyche.	And	yet	for	a	certain	distance	at	least	this
nonpsychic	world	lies	within	the	unconscious.	Here	we	approach	the	borders
of	great	mysteries:	the	basis	for	extrapsychic	perception,	synchronicity,
miracle	healings	of	the	body,	and	others.
As	a	scientist,	Jung	had	to	provide	arguments	and	evidence	for	such	bold
hypotheses	as	the	existence	of	the	unconscious,	both	its	personal	and
collective	aspects.	Here	he	merely	alludes	to	these	arguments,	which	in	other
writings	are	developed	in	great	detail:	“Group	two	can	be	inferred	from	the
spontaneous	irruption	of	subliminal	contents	into	consciousness.”
12
	This
describes	how	complexes	affect	consciousness.	“Group	three	is	hypothetical;
it	is	a	logical	inference	from	the	facts	underlying	group	two.”
13
	Certain
consistent	patterns	in	the	complexes	led	Jung	to	hypothesize	the	archetypes.	If
certain	effects	are	sufficiently	strong	and	persistent,	a	scientist	formulates	a
hypothesis	which,	it	is	hoped,	will	account	for	the	effects	and	lead	to	further
investigation.
14
The	ego,	Jung	goes	on	in	the	
Aion
	text,	rests	on	two	bases:	a	somatic
(bodily)	and	a	psychic.	Each	of	these	bases	is	multilayered	and	exists	partially
in	consciousness	but	mostly	in	the	unconscious.	To	say	that	the	ego	rests	on
them	is	to	say	that	the	ego’s	roots	reach	into	the	unconscious.	In	its	upper
structure,	the	ego	is	rational,	cognitive,	and	reality-oriented,	but	in	its	deeper

and	more	hidden	layers	it	is	subject	to	the	flux	of	emotion,	fantasy,	and
conflict,	and	to	intrusions	from	the	physical	and	psychic	levels	of	the
unconscious.	The	ego	can	be	easily	disturbed,	therefore,	both	by	somatic
problems	and	by	psychic	conflicts.	A	purely	psychic	entity,	a	vital	center	of
consciousness,	the	home	of	identity	and	volition,	the	ego	in	its	deeper	layers
is	vulnerable	to	disturbances	from	many	sources.
As	I	pointed	out	above,	the	ego	must	be	distinguished	from	the	field	of
consciousness	in	which	it	is	nested	and	for	which	it	forms	the	focal	point	of
reference.	Jung	writes:	“When	I	said	that	the	ego	‘rests’	on	the	total	field	of
consciousness	I	do	not	mean	that	it	consists	of	this.	Were	that	so,	it	would	be
indistinguishable	from	the	field	of	consciousness	as	a	whole.”
15
	Like	William
James	who	distinguished	between	the	“I”	and	the	“me,”
16
	Jung	draws	a
difference	between	the	ego	and	what	James	called	“the	stream	of
consciousness.”	The	ego	is	a	point	or	a	dot	that	dips	into	the	stream	and	can
separate	itself	from	the	stream	of	consciousness	and	become	aware	of	it	as
something	other	than	itself.	Consciousness	is	not	fully	under	the	ego’s	control
even	if	it	gains	distance	from	it	sufficient	to	observe	and	study	its	flow.	The
ego	moves	around	within	the	field	of	consciousness,	observing,	selecting,
directing	motor	activity	to	an	extent,	but	also	ignoring	a	good	deal	of	material
that	consciousness	is	otherwise	attending	to.	If	you	drive	a	car	on	a	familiar
route,	the	ego’s	attention	will	frequently	wander	and	attend	to	matters	other
than	driving.	You	arrive	safely	at	your	destination,	having	negotiated	traffic
lights	and	numerous	hazardous	traffic	situations,	wondering	how	you	got
there!	The	focus	of	attention	was	elsewhere,	the	ego	had	wandered	off	and	left
the	driving	to	non-egoic	consciousness.	Consciousness,	meanwhile,	aside
from	the	ego,	is	constantly	monitoring,	taking	in,	processing,	and	reacting	to
information.	Should	a	crisis	occur,	the	ego	returns	and	takes	charge.	The	ego
often	focuses	on	a	memory,	on	a	thought	or	feeling,	or	on	plans	which	it	has
plucked	out	of	the	stream	of	consciousness.	It	leaves	other	routine	operations
to	an	habituated	consciousness.	This	separability	of	the	ego	from
consciousness	is	a	mild	and	non-pathological	form	of	dissociation.	The	ego
can	dissociate	from	consciousness,	to	a	degree.
Although	a	rudimentary	or	primitive	ego	seems	to	be	present	from	the
earliest	moments	of	consciousness	as	a	sort	of	virtual	center	or	focal	point,	it
does	grow	and	develop	in	important	respects	during	the	early	phases	of
infancy	and	later	childhood.	Jung	writes:	“Although	its	bases	are	themselves
relatively	unknown	and	unconscious,	both	psychic	and	somatic,	the	ego	is	a
conscious	factor	par	excellence.	It	is	even	acquired,	empirically	speaking,
during	the	individual’s	lifetime.	It	seems	to	arise	in	the	first	place	from	the

collision	between	the	somatic	factor	and	the	environment,	and,	once
established	as	a	subject,	it	goes	on	developing	from	further	collisions	with	the
outer	world	and	the	inner.”
17
	What	makes	the	ego	grow,	according	to	Jung,	is
what	he	calls	“collisions.”	In	other	words,	conflict,	trouble,	anguish,	sorrow,
suffering.	These	are	what	lead	the	ego	to	develop.	The	requirements	made
upon	a	person	to	adapt	to	physical	and	psychic	environments	draws	upon	a
potential	center	in	consciousness	and	strengthens	its	capacity	to	function,	in
order	to	focus	consciousness	and	to	mobilize	the	organism	in	a	specific
direction.	As	a	virtual	center	of	consciousness,	the	ego	is	innate,	but	as	an
actual	and	effective	center	it	owes	its	stature	to	those	collisions	between	the
psycho-physical	body	and	an	environmental	milieu	that	demands	response
and	adaptation.	A	moderate	amount	of	conflict	with	the	environment	and
some	frustration	are,	therefore,	according	to	Jung,	the	best	conditions	for	ego
growth.
These	collisions	may	be	catastrophic,	however,	and	lead	to	severe	damage
to	the	psyche.	Then	the	nascent	ego	is	not	strengthened	but	rather	injured	and
so	severely	traumatized	that	its	later	functioning	is	radically	impaired.	Infant
abuse	and	childhood	sexual	trauma	are	examples	of	such	psychic
catastrophes.	From	these	the	ego	is	often	permanently	impaired	in	its	lower
psychic	registers.	Cognitively	it	may	be	able	to	function	normally,	but	in	its
less	conscious	parts	the	emotional	turmoil	and	absence	of	cohesive	structure
create	severe	character	disorders	and	dissociative	tendencies.	Such	egos	are
not	merely	vulnerable	in	a	normal	fashion—as	all	egos	are—but	they	are
fragile	and	hyperdefensive.	They	fragment	easily	under	stress	and	therefore
tend	to	resort	to	primitive	(but	very	powerful)	defenses	to	wall	off	the	world
and	to	protect	the	psyche	from	intrusions	and	possible	injury.	Such	people
cannot	trust	others.	Paradoxically,	they	are	also	constantly	let	down	and
seriously	disappointed	by	others	and	by	life	in	general.	Gradually	these
people	isolate	themselves	from	the	environment,	which	is	perceived	as
overwhelmingly	threatening,	and	they	live	out	their	lives	in	defensive
isolation.
The	nascent	ego	might	be	described	as	an	infant’s	cry	of	anguish	signaling
a	discrepancy	between	need	and	satisfaction.	From	there	it	begins	to	develop
and	eventually	it	becomes	more	complex.	By	the	time	a	two-year-old	child’s
ego	is	saying	“no”	to	everybody,	it	is	not	only	coping	with	environmental
challenges,	but	it	is	already	trying	to	change	or	to	control	many	aspects	of	its
environment.	That	little	person’s	ego	is	very	busy	strengthening	
itself	by
creating	numerous	collisions,	and	that	“no!”	and	“I	won’t!”	are	exercises	that
strengthen	the	ego	as	a	separate	entity	and	as	a	strong	inner	center	of	will,

intentionality,	and	control.
An	ego	that	has	achieved	autonomy	in	childhood	feels	also	that
consciousness	can	be	harnessed	and	directed	at	will.	The	guardedness
characteristic	of	the	overly	anxious	person	is	an	indication	that	the	ego	has	not
fully	achieved	this	level	of	confident	autonomy.	More	openness	and	flexibility
is	possible	when	the	ego	has	acquired	a	degree	of	control	sufficient	to	insure
survival	and	basic	need-gratification.
Jung’s	notion	of	ego	development	arising	from	collisions	with	the
environment	offers	a	creative	way	of	viewing	the	potential	in	all	of	those
inevitable	human	experiences	of	frustration	in	the	face	of	an	ungratifying
environment.	As	the	ego	tries	to	apply	its	will,	it	meets	a	certain	measure	of
resistance	from	the	environment,	and	if	this	collision	is	handled	well	the	result
will	be	the	ego’s	growth.	This	insight	also	cautions	us	against	trying	to
provide	too	much	insulation	for	a	child	against	the	onslaughts	of	a
challenging	reality.	For	stimulating	ego	growth,	a	constant-climated
overprotective	environment	is	not	particularly	useful.
Psychological	Types
A	brief	discussion	of	Jung’s	theory	of	psychological	types	also	belongs	in	this
chapter	on	ego-consciousness.	The	editors	of	Jung’s	
Collected	Works
	quote
Jung	in	their	introductory	note	to	
Psychological	Types
	as	viewing	this	work	to
be	“a	psychology	of	consciousness	regarded	from	what	might	be	called	a
clinical	angle.”
18
	The	two	major	
attitudes
	(introversion	and	extroversion)	and
the	four	
functions
	(thinking,	feeling,	sensation,	and	intuition)	have	a	strong
influence	upon	the	ego’s	orientation	as	it	undertakes	its	adaptive	tasks	and
requirements.	The	core	ego’s	innate	disposition	toward	assuming	one	of	these
attitudes	and	functions	forms	its	characteristic	stance	toward	the	world	and
toward	assimilating	experience.
Collisions	with	reality	awaken	the	nascent	ego’s	potentiality	and	challenge
it	to	relate	to	the	world.	Such	collisions	also	
interrupt	the	psyche’s
participation	mystique
19
	with	the	surrounding	world.	Once	aroused,	the	ego
must	adapt	itself	to	reality	by	whatever	means	are	available.	Jung	theorized
that	there	are	four	such	means	or	functions	of	the	ego,	each	of	which	could	be
oriented	by	either	an	introverted	(i.e.,	inward-looking)	or	extroverted
(outward-looking)	attitude.	After	a	certain	amount	of	ego	development	has

taken	place,	the	person’s	innate	tendency	to	orient	to	the	world,	both	within
and	without,	will	reveal	itself	in	certain	definite	ways.	Jung	argued	that	the
ego	has	an	inborn,	genetic	tendency	to	prefer	one	particular	
type
	of	attitude
and	function	combination	and	to	rely	secondarily	on	another	complementary
combination	for	balance,	with	a	third	and	fourth	remaining	less	used	and
consequently	less	available	and	developed.	The	combinations	make	up	what
he	called	“psychological	types.”
For	example,	a	person	is	born	with	an	innate	tendency	to	assume	an
introverted	attitude	toward	the	world.	This	first	manifests	itself	as	shyness	in
the	infant,	and	later	it	develops	into	a	preference	to	pursue	solitary	interests
such	as	reading	and	studying.	If	this	is	combined	with	an	innate	tendency
toward	adapting	to	the	environment	by	using	the	function	of	thinking,	this
person	will	be	naturally	inclined	to	adapt	to	the	world	by	seeking	out
activities,	such	as	science	or	scholarship,	which	match	these	tendencies.	In
such	arenas	this	person	does	well,	feels	confident,	and	finds	satisfaction
functioning	in	a	way	that	comes	naturally.	In	other	areas,	such	as	socializing
or	selling	newspaper	subscriptions	door	to	door,	this	introverted	thinking
orientation	is	much	less	useful,	and	the	person	feels	at	a	loss	often	with
considerable	discomfort	and	stress.	If	this	person	is	born	into	a	culture	that
rewards	the	extroverted	attitude	more	than	the	introverted	one,	or	into	a
family	that	negatively	reinforces	introversion,	the	ego	is	forced	to	adapt	to	the
environment	by	developing	extroversion.	This	comes	at	a	high	price.	The
introverted	person	must	assume	a	good	deal	of	chronic	psychological	stress	in
order	to	make	this	work.	Since	this	ego	adaptation	does	not	come	naturally,	it
will	also	strike	the	observer	as	artificial.	It	does	not	work	very	well,	and	yet	it
is	necessary.	Such	a	person	functions	with	a	handicap,	just	as	a	natural
extrovert	would	take	on	a	handicap	in	an	introverted	culture.
Typological	differences	between	people	lead	to	a	great	deal	of	conflict
within	families	and	groups.	Children	who	are	typologically	different	from
their	parents	are	often	misunderstood	and	may	be	coerced	into	adopting	a
false	typology	that	conforms	to	parental	preferences.	The	child	with	the
“correct”	typological	profile	will	be	preferred	and	become	the	favorite.	This
sets	the	stage	for	sibling	rivalry	and	envy.	Each	child	in	a	large	family	will	be
somewhat	different	typologically,	as	the	parents	usually	are	also.	The
extroverts	may	gang	up	on	the	introverts,	and	the	introverts	are	not	as	good	at
forming	gangs	and	teams.	On	the	other	hand,	introverts	are	better	at	hiding.	If
the	differences	of	type	can	be	recognized	as	a	positive	value	and	appreciated,
there	can	be	a	great	enrichment	in	family	life	and	group	politics.	What	one
person	can	contribute,	others	will	find	to	be	beneficial	precisely	because	they

are	not	tuned	into	the	same	wavelength.	Recognition	and	positive	appreciation
of	typological	differences	can	form	the	basis	for	creative	pluralism	in	familial
and	cultural	life.
This	combination	of	a	superior	function	and	a	preferred	attitude	make	up
the	ego’s	single	best	tool	for	adapting	to	and	interacting	with	the	inner	and
outer	worlds.	The	inferior	fourth	function,	on	the	other	hand,	is	the	least
available	for	ego	utilization.	The	secondary	function	is,	next	to	the	superior
function,	the	most	useful	to	the	ego,	and	the	superior	and	secondary	functions
in	combination	are	most	frequently	and	effectively	used	for	orientation	and
accomplishment.	As	a	rule	one	of	these	two	best	functions	is	extroverted	and
the	other	is	introverted,	the	extroverted	function	giving	a	reading	of	external
reality	and	the	introverted	function	providing	information	about	what	is	going
on	within.	The	ego	uses	these	tools	to	control	and	to	transform	both	inner	and
outer	worlds	to	the	best	of	its	ability.
Much	of	what	we	experience	of	other	people,	and	indeed	much	of	what	we
come	to	recognize	as	our	own	personalities,	does	not	belong	to	ego-
consciousness.	The	vitality	a	person	communicates,	the	spontaneous	reactions
and	emotional	responses	to	others	and	to	life,	the	burst	of	humor	and	the
moods	and	spells	of	sadness,	the	puzzling	complications	of	psychological	life
—all	of	these	qualities	and	attributes	will	be	assigned	to	other	aspects	of	the
larger	
psyche,	not	to	ego-consciousness	as	such.	So	it	is	incorrect	to	think	of
the	ego	as	being	equivalent	to	the	whole	person.	The	ego	is	simply	an	agent,	a
focus	of	consciousness,	a	center	of	awareness.	We	can	attribute	either	too
much	or	too	little	to	it.
Personal	Freedom
Once	the	ego	has	achieved	sufficient	autonomy	and	a	measure	of	control	over
consciousness,	the	feeling	of	personal	freedom	becomes	a	strong	feature	of
subjective	reality.	Throughout	childhood	and	adolescence,	the	range	of
personal	freedom	is	tested,	challenged,	and	expanded.	Typically	a	young
person	lives	with	an	illusion	of	much	greater	self-control	and	free	will	than	is
psychologically	true.	All	the	limitations	on	freedom	seem	to	be	imposed	from
the	outside,	from	society	and	external	regulations,	and	there	is	little	awareness
of	how	the	ego	is	just	as	much	controlled	from	within.	Closer	reflection
reveals	that	one	is	as	enslaved	to	one’s	own	character	structure	and	inner
demons	as	to	external	authority.	Often	this	is	not	realized	until	the	second	half

of	life,	when	there	is	typically	a	dawning	awareness	that	one	is	one’s	own
worst	enemy,	harshest	critic,	and	severest	taskmaster.	Fate	is	spun	from	within
as	well	as	dictated	from	without.
Jung	has	some	thought-provoking	reflections	to	offer	on	the	question	of
how	free	the	will	actually	is.	As	we	will	see	in	the	chapters	to	come,	the	ego	is
only	a	small	part	of	a	much	larger	psychological	world,	like	the	earth	is	a
small	part	of	the	solar	system.	Learning	that	the	earth	revolves	around	the	sun
is	similar	to	becoming	aware	that	the	ego	revolves	around	a	greater	psychic
entity,	the	self.	Both	insights	are	disturbing	and	destabilizing	to	the	person
who	has	put	the	ego	at	the	center.	The	freedom	of	the	ego	is	limited.	“Inside
the	field	of	consciousness	[the	ego]	has,	as	we	say,	free	will,”	Jung	writes.
“By	this	I	do	not	mean	anything	philosophical,	only	the	well-known
psychological	fact	of	‘free	choice’,	or	rather	the	subjective	feeling	of
freedom.”
20
	Within	its	own	domain,	ego-consciousness	has	an	amount	of
apparent	freedom.	But	what	is	the	extent	of	this?	And	to	what	degree	do	we
make	our	choices	on	the	basis	of	conditioning	and	habit?	
Choosing	a	Coke
rather	than	a	Pepsi	reflects	a	measure	of	freedom,	but	in	fact	this	choice	is
limited	by	previous	conditioning	such	as	advertising	and	by	the	availability	or
lack	of	other	alternatives.	A	child	may	be	encouraged	to	practice	free	will	and
to	make	discriminations	by	being	given	a	choice	among	three	kinds	of	shirts,
for	example.	The	child’s	ego	feels	gratified,	for	it	is	free	to	choose	the	one	it
wants.	Yet	the	child’s	will	is	limited	by	many	factors:	the	subtle	wish	to
please	the	parent,	or	contrarily	the	wish	to	rebel	against	the	parent;	by	the
range	of	possibilities	offered;	by	peer	group	pressures	and	requirements.	Our
actual	range	of	free	will	is,	like	the	child’s,	limited	by	habit,	pressure,
availability,	conditioning	and	many	other	factors.	In	Jung’s	words,	“just	as	our
free	will	clashes	with	necessity	in	the	outside	world,	so	it	also	finds	its	limits
outside	the	field	of	consciousness	in	the	subjective	inner	world	where	it
comes	into	conflict	with	the	facts	of	the	self.”
21
	The	outside	world	inflicts
political	and	economic	limitations,	but	subjective	factors	limit	us	equally
much	from	exercising	free	choice.
Broadly	speaking,	it	is	the	contents	of	the	unconscious	that	curtail	the	free
will	of	the	ego.	The	Apostle	Paul	expressed	this	classically	when	he
confessed:	“I	do	not	understand	my	own	actions.	For	I	do	not	do	what	I	want,
but	I	do	the	very	thing	I	hate	…	I	can	will	what	is	right	but	I	cannot	do	it.”
22
Demons	of	contrariness	conflict	with	the	ego.	Jung	concurs:	“just	as
circumstances	and	outside	events	‘happen’	to	us	and	limit	our	freedom,	so	the
self	acts	upon	the	ego	like	an	objective	occurrence,	which	free	will	can	do
very	little	to	alter.”
23
	When	the	psyche	takes	over	the	ego	as	an	uncontrollable

inner	necessity,	the	ego	feels	defeated	and	has	to	face	the	requirement	of
accepting	its	inability	to	control	inner	reality	just	as	it	has	to	come	to	this
conclusion	regarding	the	larger	surrounding	social	and	physical	worlds.	Most
people	in	the	course	of	their	lives	come	to	realize	that	they	cannot	control	the
external	world,	but	fairly	few	become	conscious	that	inner	psychic	processes
are	not	subject	to	ego	control	either.
With	this	discussion	we	have	begun	to	enter	the	territory	of	the
unconscious.	In	the	next	chapters	I	will	describe	Jung’s	vision	of	the
unconscious	areas	of	the	human	psyche,	which	make	up	by	far	the	vast
majority	of	its	territory.

2
The	Populated	Interior
(The	Complexes)
In	the	previous	chapter,	we	saw	that	ego-consciousness—the	surface	of	the
psyche—is	subject	to	disturbances	and	emotional	reactions	that	are	created	by
collisions	between	the	individual	and	the	external	environment.	Jung	felt	that
these	collisions	between	psyche	and	world	have	a	positive	function.	If	not	too
harsh,	they	tend	to	stimulate	ego	development	because	they	demand	greater
focusing	capacity	on	the	part	of	consciousness	and	eventually	this	leads	to
stronger	problem-solving	ability	and	greater	individual	autonomy.	Forced	to
make	choices	and	take	stands,	a	person	develops	the	capacity	to	do	more	of
the	same	and	to	do	it	better.	This	is	like	building	a	muscle	by	applying
isometric	tension.	The	ego	grows	through	many	such	vigorous	interactions
with	the	world.	Dangers,	attractions,	annoyances,	threats,	and	frustrations
from	other	people	and	various	environmental	factors	all	arouse	a	certain	level
of	focused	energy	in	consciousness,	and	the	ego	is	mobilized	to	deal	with
these	aspects	of	the	impinging	world.
There	are	other	disturbances	of	consciousness,	however,	that	are	not	clearly
linked	to	environmental	causes	and	are	out	of	all	proportion	to	the	observable
stimuli.	What	causes	these	
disturbances	are	not	primarily	outer	but	inner
collisions.	People	sometimes	go	crazy	for	little	apparent	reason.	Or	they	have
bizarre	internal	imaginary	experiences	that	lead	to	inexplicable	forms	of
behavior.	They	become	psychotic,	they	hallucinate,	they	dream,	or	they	just
plain	get	mad	or	fall	in	love	or	run	amuck.	Humans	do	not	always	act
rationally	and	behave	according	to	clear	calculations	of	personal	interest.	The
“rational	man,”	on	whom	so	much	economic	theory	is	based,	is	at	best	only	a
partial	description	of	human	beings	as	they	actually	function.	Humans	are
driven	by	psychic	forces,	motivated	by	thoughts	that	are	not	based	on	rational
processes,	and	subject	to	images	and	influences	beyond	those	that	can	be

measured	in	the	observable	environment.	In	short,	we	are	emotion-	and
image-driven	creatures	as	much	as	we	are	rational	and	environmentally
adapted	ones.	We	dream	as	much	as	we	cogitate,	and	we	feel	probably	a	lot
more	than	we	think.	At	the	very	least,	a	lot	of	thinking	is	colored	and	shaped
by	emotions,	and	most	of	our	rational	calculations	are	servants	of	our	passions
and	fears.	It	was	to	understand	this	less	rational	side	of	human	nature	that	led
Jung	to	take	up	the	tools	of	scientific	method	and	spend	his	life	investigating
what	shapes	and	motivates	human	emotion,	fantasy,	and	behavior.	This	inner
world	was	a	
terra	incognita
	in	his	day.	And	he	discovered	that	it	is	populated.
Reaching	the	Unconscious
Imagine	for	a	moment	that	the	psyche	is	a	three-dimensional	object	like	the
solar	system.	Ego-consciousness	is	the	earth,	
terra	firma;
	it	is	where	we	live,
at	least	during	our	waking	hours.	The	space	around	the	earth	is	filled	with
satellites	and	meteorites,	some	large,	some	small.	This	space	is	what	Jung
called	the	unconscious,	and	the	objects	that	we	first	come	across	as	we
venture	out	into	this	space	are	what	he	called	the	
complexes
.	The	unconscious
is	populated	by	complexes.	This	is	the	territory	that	Jung	explored	initially	in
his	career	as	a	psychiatrist.	He	later	called	it	the	
personal
	
unconscious.
He	began	to	map	this	area	of	the	psyche	even	before	he	looked	very	closely
at	the	ego	complex	or	at	the	nature	of	consciousness.
He	undertook	this	initial	exploration	by	using	a	scientific	instrument	that	was
highly	regarded	at	the	turn	of	the	century,	the	Word	Association	Experiment.
1
Later	he	also	employed	some	insights	gleaned	from	the	early	writings	of
Sigmund	Freud.	Armed	with	the	notion	of	unconscious	determination	of
mental	processes	and	the	Word	Association	Experiment,	Jung	led	a	team	of
researchers	on	the	scientific	project	of	conducting	carefully	controlled
laboratory	experiments	to	see	if	such	unconscious	psychological	factors	could
be	verified	empirically.
The	results	of	this	project	were	assembled	in	the	book	
Diagnostische
Assoziationstudien	(Studies	in	Word	Association),
	
edited	by	Jung.	These
studies	were	carried	out	at	the	Psychiatric	Clinic	of	the	University	of	Zurich
with	the	support	and	encouragement	of	his	teacher,	Eugen	Bleuler.
2
	The
project	was	conceived	in	1902	and	continued	over	the	next	five	years.	The
results	were	singly	published	between	1904	to	1910	in	
Journal	für

Psychologie	und	Neurologie.
	It	was	in	the	course	of	these	experimental
studies	that	Jung	began	to	use	the	term	“complex,”	which	he	borrowed	from
the	German	psychologist	Ziehen	but	expanded	and	enriched	with	a	great	deal
of	his	own	research	and	theorizing.	This	term	was	later	also	adopted	by	Freud
and	was	used	widely	in	psychoanalytic	circles
3
	until	Freud	and	Jung	ended
their	relationship,	after	which	it	was	more	or	less	completely	deleted,	along
with	Jung	and	everything	“Jungian,”	from	the	Freudian	lexicon.
The	theory	of	complexes	was	Jung’s	most	important	early	contribution	to
the	understanding	of	the	unconscious	and	its	structure.	Partially	it	was	Jung’s
way	of	conceptualizing	what	Freud	had	been	writing	about	up	to	that	point	on
the	psychological	results	of	repression,	on	the	enduring	importance	of
childhood	for	the	structure	of	character,	and	on	the	puzzle	of	resistance	in
analysis.	It	continues	to	be	a	useful	concept	in	analytic	practice	to	this	day.
How	did	he	first	come	to	discover	and	map	this	feature	of	the	unconscious?
The	question	was	how	to	penetrate	into	the	mind	beyond	the	barriers	of
consciousness.	Consciousness	can	be	investigated	by	simply	asking	questions
and	noting	responses,	or	by	introspecting.	But	how	could	one	go	deeper	into
the	subjective	world	and	
explore	its	structures	and	workings?	To	get	at	this
problem,	Jung	and	a	team	of	fellow	psychiatric	residents	set	up	a	series	of
experiments	with	human	subjects	to	see	if,	by	bombarding	the	psyche	with
verbal	stimuli	and	observing	the	responses	in	consciousness—the	“tracks,”	so
to	speak,	of	subtle	emotional	reactions—they	could	find	evidence	of
underlying	structures.	Working	closely	with	his	colleagues	Bleuler,	Wehrlin,
Ruerst,	Binswanger,	Nunberg,	and	most	importantly	Riklin,	Jung	first	refined
the	Word	Association	Experiment	for	their	purposes	and	settled	on	400
common,	everyday,	seemingly	neutral	stimulus	words—words	like	table,
head,	ink,	needle,	bread,	and	lamp.
4
	
Scattered	among	these	words	were	more
provocative	ones—war,	faithful,	to	strike,	to	stroke.	This	number	was	later
reduced	to	100.	These	stimulus	words,	read	one	by	one	to	a	subject	who	had
been	instructed	to	respond	with	the	first	word	that	came	to	mind,	elicited	a
wide	variety	of	reactions.	There	would	be	long	pauses,	nonsensical	responses,
rhymes	and	“klang”	responses,	and	even	physiological	reactions	that	could	be
measured	using	a	device	called	a	psychogalvanometer.
5
The	interesting	question	for	Jung	was,	what	is	happening	in	the	psyche	of
the	test	subject	when	the	stimulus	word	is	spoken?	He	looked	for	emotion,
and	in	particular	for	signs	of	stimulation	of	anxiety	and	its	effects	upon
consciousness.	The	response	times	were	clocked	and	recorded	along	with	the
verbatim	responses.	Then	all	the	stimulus	words	were	repeated	a	second	time,

and	the	subject	was	asked	to	repeat	each	earlier	response.	Again	the	results
were	noted.	The	test	was	then	analyzed,	first	by	calculating	the	subject’s
average	response	time,	to	which	all	other	response	times	were	compared.
Some	words	might	take	one	second	to	elicit	a	response,	others	ten	seconds;
others	might	produce	no	response	at	all	as	the	subject	blocked	completely.
Then	other	types	of	responses	were	noted.	Some	words	would	be	met	with
idiosyncratic	responses	such	as	rhymes,	nonsense	words,	or	uncommon
associations.	Jung	considered	these	responses	to	be	
complex	indicators
—
signs	of	anxiety	and	evidence	of	defensive	reactions	against	unconscious
psychological	conflicts.	What	could	they	tell	him	about	the	nature	of	the
unconscious?
The	Complexes
Jung	assumed	that	the	disturbances	of	consciousness,	which	were	registered
and	measured	as	responses	to	these	verbal	stimuli,	were	due	to	unconscious
associations	to	the	words	read.	Here	his	thinking	was	congruent	with	Freud’s
as	expressed	in	
The	Interpretation	of	Dreams
,	where	Freud	had	argued	that
dream	images	could	be	linked	up	with	thoughts	and	feelings	from	the
previous	day	(or	even	from	previous	years,	including	the	time	all	the	way
back	to	early	childhood).	Such	associations,	however,	are	extremely	obscure
and	hidden.	The	associations	exist,	Jung	reasoned,	not	between	the	stimulus
and	response	words,	but	rather	between	the	stimulus	words	and	hidden,
unconscious	contents.	Some	stimulus	words	activate	unconscious	contents,
and	these	are	associated	with	yet	other	contents.	When	stimulated,	this
network	of	associated	material—made	out	of	repressed	memories,	fantasies,
images,	thoughts—produces	a	disturbance	in	consciousness.	The	complex
indicators	are	the	signs	of	disturbance.	Precisely	what	causes	the	disturbance
still	needs	to	be	ferreted	out,	and	this	was	done	through	further	questioning	of
the	subject	and	then	through	more	analysis	if	that	was	needed.	But	the
disturbances	registered	by	this	experiment	provided	the	key	sites	for	further
exploration	and	offered	evidence	that	unconscious	structures	were	indeed
located	beneath	the	level	of	awareness.	Often	subjects	did	not	at	first	know
why	certain	words	caused	these	reactions.
Jung	observed	that	measurable	disturbances	in	the	stream	of	consciousness
are	sometimes	related	to	seemingly	innocuous	stimulus	words	like	“table”	or
“barn.”	Analyzing	the	patterns	of	response,	he	found	that	the	words	showing

disturbance	can	be	clustered	thematically.	These	clusters	point	to	a	common
content.	When	the	subjects	were	asked	to	talk	about	their	associations	to	these
clusters	of	stimulus	words,	they	gradually	were	able	to	tell	him	about	highly
charged	emotional	moments	in	their	past.	Usually	traumas	were	involved.	The
stimulus	words,	it	turned	out,	had	aroused	painful	associations	that	had	been
buried	in	the	unconscious,	and	these	stressful	associations	were	what	had
disturbed	consciousness.	The	unconscious	contents	responsible	for	the
disturbances	of	consciousness	Jung	called	“complexes.”
Having	established	that	complexes	exist	in	the	unconscious,	Jung	was
interested	in	examining	them	further.	With	tools	such	as	the	Word	Association
Experiment	he	could	measure	them	rather	precisely.	Exact	measurement
could	transform	vague	intuitions	and	speculative	theories	into	data	and	into
science,	a	fact	very	pleasing	to	Jung’s	scientific	temperament.	Jung	found	that
he	could	measure	the	emotional	charge	held	by	a	particular	complex	if	he
simply	added	up	the	number	of	complex	indicators	it	generated	and	the
severity	of	these	disturbances.	This	indicated	to	him	the	relative	quantity	of
psychic	energy	bound	up	in	that	complex.	Investigation	of	the	unconscious
could	thus	be	quantified.	This	information	would	also	become	important	for
therapy,	as	a	guide	to	where	the	most	severe	emotional	problems	of	a	patient
were	located	and	what	work	needed	to	be	done	in	the	treatment.	It	is
especially	useful	for	short-term	psychotherapy.
The	results	of	his	experiments	convinced	Jung	that	there	are	indeed	psychic
entities	outside	of	consciousness,	which	exist	as	satellite-like	objects	in
relation	to	ego-consciousness	but	are	able	to	cause	ego	disturbances	in	a
surprising	and	sometimes	overwhelming	way.	They	are	the	gremlins	and	inner
demons	that	may	catch	a	person	by	surprise.	The	disturbances	caused	by
complexes	must	be	differentiated,	understandably,	from	disturbances	brought
about	by	stressors	originating	in	the	external	environment,	even	though	they
may	and	often	do	relate	intimately	to	one	another.
When	Jung	sent	his	
Diagnostischen	Assoziationstudien
	to	Freud	in	April
1906,	Freud	immediately	recognized	a	kindred	spirit	and	wrote	him	a	warm
letter	of	thanks.	The	two	men	met	a	year	later,	and	from	that	moment	until
they	finally	ended	their	correspondence	early	in	1913,	their	relationship	was
emotionally	and	intellectually	filled	with	high	purpose	and	intensity.	One
might	say	that	they	succeeded	in	stimulating	core	complexes	in	each	other.
Certainly	they	connected	profoundly	around	their	shared	interest	in	the
unconscious.	For	Jung,	the	personal	connection	with	Freud	had	enormous
implications	for	his	career	in	
psychiatry	and	also	for	the	later	development	of
his	own	psychological	theory.	Both	his	career	and	his	theory	took	their	early

shape	in	the	shadow	of	Freud’s	growing	cultural	presence.	And	yet,	for	all
that,	Jung’s	final	map	of	the	inner	world	is	remarkably	independent	of
Freudian	influence.	Jung’s	mind	was	fundamentally	non-Freudian,	and	so	his
map	of	the	psyche	is	vastly	different	from	Freud’s.	For	readers	who	are
familiar	with	Freud’s	work,	this	will	become	evident	in	the	remainder	of	this
book.	These	two	men	lived	in	different	intellectual	universes.
By	1910,	Jung’s	theoretical	work	on	the	complexes	was	largely	complete.
In	later	years	he	would	continue	to	elaborate	it	a	bit,	but	he	did	not	add	much
new	material	or	change	his	mind	about	the	basic	concept	of	the	complex
except	to	add	that	every	complex	contains	an	archetypal	(i.e.,	innate,
primitive)	component.	His	paper,	“A	Review	of	the	Complex	Theory,”
6
published	in	1934,	offers	an	excellent	summary.	Written	long	after	his	break
with	Freud,	Jung	makes	some	highly	complimentary	references	to	his	former
teacher	and	colleague	and	to	psychoanalysis	generally	as	he	acknowledges
Freud’s	significance	for	his	own	work	on	the	theory	of	complexes.	If	Freud’s
influence	is	to	be	found	importantly	anywhere	in	Jung’s	theories,	it	is	here.
It	is	worth	noting	that	Jung	delivered	“A	Review	of	the	Complex	Theory”
in	May	1934	in	Bad	Neuheim,	Germany	at	the	7th	Congress	for
Psychotherapy.	At	the	time,	Jung	was	president	of	the	International	Medical
Society	for	Psychotherapy,	which	sponsored	this	conference.	The	political
situation	in	Germany	was	at	the	time	fraught	with	conflict	and	confusion.	The
Nazis,	having	recently	taken	power,	were	attacking	Freud,	a	Jew,	as	a
poisonous	influence	to	be	expunged	from	German	culture.	Freud’s	books
were	burned	and	his	ideas	violently	opposed.	Jung,	who	had	been	vice
president	of	the	organization	and	had	accepted	the	presidency	in	1933,	was
faced	with	a	complicated	and	dangerous	set	of	political	options.	On	the	one
hand,	it	was	a	terrible	time	to	be	the	leader	of	any	type	of	organization	in
German-speaking	lands.	The	Nazis	watched	like	hawks	for	the	least	sign	of
departure	from	their	racist	doctrines.	This	medical	society	was	no	exception.
Jung	was	heavily	pressured	to	say	what	the	German	officials	wanted	to	
hear
and	to	conform	to	their	program.	On	the	other	hand,	it	was	a	moment	when	a
non-German	psychiatrist	could	possibly	make	a	difference	in	this
international	association.	It	was	Jung’s	intent	to	preserve	the	organization	as
an	international	medical	society.	One	of	his	first	acts	as	president	was	to
modify	the	constitution	so	that	German	Jewish	doctors	could	maintain	their
membership	as	individual	members	even	though	they	were	excluded	from	all
German	medical	societies.	In	1933	there	was	no	way	to	know	how	effective
and	all-consuming	the	evil	impulse	of	the	Nazi	leaders	would	turn	out	to	be.
On	the	shadow	side	of	the	ledger,	however,	this	was	also	a	moment	of

professional	opportunity	for	Jung.	Freud	had	been	pre-eminent	among
psychiatrists	and	psychologists	in	Germany	for	the	past	decade,	and	now
Jung’s	ideas	had	a	chance	to	come	to	the	fore.	Jung	was	walking	a	moral
tightrope.	The	world	was	watching,	and	every	move	he	made	during	this
period	influenced	public	opinion.	Jung’s	decision	to	accept	the	presidency	of
this	medical	organization	in	1933	and	his	subsequent	role	in	it	until	1940	have
been	the	cause	for	a	great	deal	of	heated	discussion	then	and	now.	Charges
that	Jung	was	sympathetic	to	Hitler’s	policies	and	to	the	Nazi	program	of
“purifying”	the	German	
volk
	have	an	important	source	in	the	things	he
actually,	perhaps	inadvertently	and	under	severe	political	pressure,	said	and
did	in	his	first	years	as	president.
7
One	item	in	Jung’s	favor	is	that	he	did	present	this	particular	paper,	“A
Review	of	the	Complex	Theory,”	at	Bad	Neuheim	in	1934,	for	in	this
presidential	address	he	does	not	discount	the	importance	of	Freud.	In	fact,	he
credits	him	with	as	much	influence	as	he	could	reasonably	be	expected	to	give
to	an	early	mentor	with	whom	he	had	broken	and	to	whom	he	had	not	spoken
for	twenty	years.	In	1934,	it	was	courageous	to	speak	in	even	mildly	positive
tones	about	Freud	in	Germany.	Jung	was	if	anything	protecting	Freud’s
international	reputation	by	giving	him	so	much	credit	in	this	paper.
The	paper	begins	with	a	discussion	of	the	word	association	work	Jung
sponsored	and	carried	out	in	the	early	years	of	his	career.	Having	learned	a
great	deal	in	the	meantime	about	how	
human	beings	react	to	one	another	in
clinical	and	other	intimate	settings,	he	starts	by	focusing	on	the	psychological
dimensions	of	the	experimental	situation.	He	points	out	that	in	and	of	itself
this	testing	situation	already	leads	to	the	constellation	of	complexes.
Personalities	affect	each	other,	and	when	they	begin	to	interact	a	psychic	field
is	set	up	between	them	which	stimulates	the	complexes.
The	term	“constellation”	appears	frequently	in	Jung’s	writings	and	is	an
important	one	in	the	Jungian	lexicon.	It	is	a	word	that	often	mystifies	readers
at	first.	Usually	it	refers	to	the	creation	of	a	psychologically	charged	moment,
a	moment	when	consciousness	either	already	is,	or	is	about	to	become,
disturbed	by	a	complex.	“This	term	simply	expresses	the	fact	that	the	outward
situation	releases	a	psychic	process	in	which	certain	contents	gather	together
and	prepare	for	action.	When	we	say	that	a	person	is	‘constellated’	we	mean
that	he	has	taken	up	a	position	from	which	he	can	be	expected	to	react	in	a
quite	definite	way.”
8
	
Complex	reactions	are	quite	predictable	once	one	knows
what	the	specific	complexes	of	an	individual	are.	We	refer	to	the	complex-
laden	areas	of	the	psyche	colloquially	as	“buttons,”	as	in	“She	knows	how	to
press	my	buttons!”	When	you	press	such	a	button,	you	get	an	emotional

reaction.	In	other	words,	you	constellate	a	complex.	After	you	have	known	a
person	for	a	while,	you	know	where	some	of	their	buttons	are	and	either	avoid
these	tender	areas	or	go	out	of	your	way	to	touch	them.
Experientially	everyone	knows	what	it	means	to	be	constellated.	It	occurs
on	a	spectrum	from	being	slightly	anxious	to	losing	it	and	going	over	the	top
into	madness.	When	a	complex	is	constellated,	one	is	threatened	with	loss	of
control	over	one’s	emotions	and	to	some	extent	also	one’s	behavior.	One
reacts	irrationally	and	often	regrets	it	or	thinks	better	of	it	later.	For	the
psychologically-minded,	there	is	the	depressing	knowledge	that	one	has	been
here	many	times	before,	has	reacted	in	just	this	way	on	many	occasions,	and
yet	is	utterly	helpless	to	refrain	from	doing	the	same	thing	again	this	time.
When	constellated,	one	is	as	though	in	the	grip	of	a	demon,	a	force	stronger
than	one’s	will.	This	creates	a	feeling	of	helplessness.	Even	as	one	watches
oneself	
becoming	the	witless	victim	of	an	inner	compulsion	to	say	or	do
something	one	knows	should	better	be	left	unsaid	or	undone,	the	scenario
unscrolls	as	predicted	and	the	words	are	said,	the	deeds	done.	An	intrapsychic
force	has	been	called	into	action	by	a	constellating	situation.
The	architects	of	these	constellations	“are	definite	complexes	possessing
their	own	specific	energy.”
9
	The	complex’s	“energy”	(this	term	will	be
discussed	more	thoroughly	in	the	next	chapter)	refers	to	the	precise	amount	of
potential	for	feeling	and	action	that	is	bound	up	in	the	magnet-like	core	of	the
complex.	The	complexes	have	energy	and	manifest	a	sort	of	electronic	“spin”
of	their	own,	like	the	electrons	surrounding	the	nucleus	of	an	atom.	When
they	are	stimulated	by	a	situation	or	an	event,	they	give	off	a	burst	of	energy
and	jump	levels	until	they	arrive	in	consciousness.	Their	energy	penetrates	the
shell	of	ego-consciousness	and	floods	into	it,	thereby	influencing	it	to	spin	in
the	same	direction	and	to	discharge	some	of	the	emotional	energy	that	has
been	released	by	this	collision.	When	this	happens,	the	ego	is	no	longer
altogether	in	control	of	consciousness	or,	for	that	matter,	of	the	body.	The
person	becomes	subject	to	energic	discharges	that	are	not	under	the	ego’s
control.	What	the	ego	can	do,	if	it	is	strong	enough,	is	to	contain	some	of	the
complex’s	energy	within	itself	and	to	minimize	emotional	and	physical
outbursts.	But,	to	a	degree,	none	of	us	is	wholly	responsible	for	what	we	say
and	do	while	in	the	grip	of	a	complex.	Needless	to	say,	this	does	not	constitute
an	effective	defense	in	a	court	of	law.	Sometimes	society	demands	a	higher
standard	than	the	psyche	will	allow.
The	complexity	(pardon	the	pun)	of	the	psyche	is	becoming	apparent.	In
fact,	Jung’s	theory	was	sometimes	called	complex	psychology	(rather	than	the
more	usual	name	for	it,	analytical	psychology):	both	complexity	and	the

concept	of	complexes	are	fundamental	to	his	view	of	the	psyche.	The	psyche
is	made	up	of	many	centers,	each	of	them	possessing	energy	and	even	some
consciousness	and	purpose	of	their	own.
In	this	conceptualization	of	the	personality,	the	ego	is	one	complex	among
many.	Each	has	its	own	specific	quantum	of	energy.	When	we	speak	of	the
ego’s	energy,	we	call	it	“free	will.”	If	
we	wish	to	refer	to	the	amount	of	energy
tied	up	in	a	complex,	we	can	speak	of	the	power	of	our	inner	demons.	These
are	the	irrational	compulsions	that	can	seize	us	and	do	with	us	more	or	less
what	they	want.	A	complex	generally	creates	its	effects	within	the	domain	of
consciousness,	but	this	is	not	always	so.	Sometimes	the	disturbances	occur
outside	of	the	psyche	altogether.	Jung	observed	that	a	complex	can	affect
objects	and	other	people	in	the	surrounding	world.	It	can	act	as	a	poltergeist
or	a	subtle	influence	on	other	people.
Jung	made	another	interesting	observation	about	complexes.	A	person	can
sometimes	block	the	effects	of	a	stimulus	and	fend	off	the	constellation	of	a
complex:	“subjects	with	strong	wills	can,	through	verbal-motor	facility,
screen	off	the	meaning	of	a	stimulus	word	by	short	reaction	times	in	such	a
way	that	it	does	not	reach	them	at	all,	but	this	only	works	when	really
important	personal	secrets	have	to	be	protected.”
10
	This	means	that	people
can	control	their	unconscious	reactions	by	deliberately	screening	out	stimuli.
To	overcome	this	obstacle	in	the	testing	situation,	Jung	cooked	up	what	is	the
precursor	of	the	lie	detector	test.	It	was	an	ingenious	extension	of	the	Word
Association	Experiment.
By	measuring	the	skin’s	electrical	conductivity	with	a	psycho-
galvanometer,	Jung	showed	that	changes	in	conductivity	correlate	with
complex	indicators.	In	other	words,	when	a	person	lies	or	tries	to	hide	the
evidence	of	a	complex-charged	reaction,	the	ego	may	be	able	to	cover	up
some	of	the	indicators,	but	it	has	a	much	more	difficult	time	suppressing	the
more	subtle	physiological	responses.	In	response	to	a	complex-stimulating
word	or	question	a	person	might	get	sweaty	palms	or	begin	shivering	or
experience	dryness	of	the	mouth.	By	measuring	skin	conductivity,	Jung
introduced	a	more	refined	method	of	collecting	complex	indicators.	By	using
this	device,	Jung	was	able	to	solve	a	case	of	robbery	in	his	psychiatric
hospital.
11
	Needless	to	say,	this	method	is	not	infallible.
Most	people’s	egos	will	normally	be	able	to	neutralize	the	effects	of
complexes	to	some	degree.	This	ability	serves	the	interests	of	adaptation	and
even	survival.	This	is	akin	(or	perhaps	identical)	to	the	ability	to	dissociate.	If
one	could	not	do	this,	the	ego	
would	become	dysfunctional	just	at	the	moment

of	greatest	danger	when	keeping	a	cool	head	is	most	desperately	needed.	In
professional	life,	it	is	essential	to	put	one’s	personal	complexes	to	the	side	for
the	sake	of	carrying	on	with	one’s	job.	Psychotherapists	have	to	be	able	to
bracket	their	own	emotions	and	personal	conflicts	when	they	are	seeing
patients.	In	order	to	be	present	for	a	patient	whose	life	is	in	shambles,	the
therapist	must	stay	calm	even	though	this	may	be	a	moment	of	chaos	in	the
therapist’s	own	life.	All	professions	demand	that	the	job	get	done	no	matter
what	is	going	on	in	personal	life.	As	they	say	in	theater,	the	show	must	go	on.
This	requires	the	ability	to	override	the	effects	of	complexes	upon	ego-
consciousness	to	at	least	some	degree.	In	discussing	this	ability	to	contain
one’s	own	personal	anxieties	and	complex	reactions,	Jung	refers	to	a
consummate	master	of	this	art,	the	diplomat	Talleyrand.	Diplomats	operate	on
instruction	from	heads	of	state	and	use	a	vocabulary	that	betrays	little	of	their
own	feeling	or	preference.	They	prize	the	art	of	speaking	in	terms	that	conceal
emotion	and	hide	complex	indicators.	And	they	have	the	advantage	of	not
being	hooked	up	to	psychogalvanometers.
Levels	of	the	Unconscious
Usually	one	considers	complexes	to	be	“personal.”	And	it	is	true	that	most
complexes	are	generated	in	a	person’s	own	specific	life	history	and	belong
strictly	to	the	individual.	But	there	are	also	family	and	social	complexes.	Such
complexes	belong	no	more	to	the	individual	than	a	disease	belongs	to	an
individual.	It	belongs	to	a	collective,	and	the	individual	“catches”	it.	This
means	that	in	society	many	people	are	similarly	wired,	psychologically
speaking.	People	who	grow	up	in	the	same	families	or	extended	kinship
groups	or	traditional	cultures	share	a	great	deal	of	this	common	unconscious
structure.	Even	in	a	large	and	diverse	society	like	America,	many	typical
experiences	are	shared	throughout	the	entire	population.	Nearly	every	child
begins	school	at	the	age	of	five	or	six,	experiences	the	same	stress	of	tests	and
trauma	of	failures	and	humiliations,	then	goes	through	the	anxiety	of	applying
to	colleges	for	further	education	or	to	businesses	for	jobs.	All	of	
these
common	experiences	at	the	hands	of	similarly	disposed	persons	in	authority
create	socially	based	psychological	patterns	through	a	kind	of	subtle
programming	of	the	personal	unconscious.	Shared	traumas	make	for	shared
complexes.	Sometimes	these	are	generational.	Earlier,	one	often	spoke	of	a
“depression	mentality”	characteristic	of	people	who	came	of	age	in	the	1930s

and	shared	the	trauma	of	the	Great	Depression.	Today	we	speak	of	the
“Vietnam	veteran”	and	assume	that	all	who	participated	in	this	war	share
more	or	less	the	same	type	of	complex-formation	from	the	traumas	of	fighting
in	that	war.
We	can	think	here	of	a	cultural	layer	of	the	unconscious,	a	sort	of	cultural
unconscious.
12
	It	is	personal	in	the	sense	that	it	is	acquired	in	the	individual’s
lifetime,	but	it	is	collective	because	it	is	shared	with	a	group.	The
unconscious,	at	this	level,	is	structured	by	larger	cultural	patterns	and
attitudes,	and	these	end	up	influencing	the	individual’s	conscious	attitudes	and
the	more	unique	complexes	within	a	nexus	of	unconscious	cultural
assumptions.	(The	cultural	unconscious	is	different	from	the	collective
unconscious,	which	I	will	discuss	in	chapter	4.)
This	raises	the	interesting	question	of	how	complexes	are	formed.	The
usual	answer	is	by	trauma.	But	this	must	be	put	into	a	wider	social	context.
Some	of	Jung’s	studies	in	word	association	looked	at	the	question	of	family
influences	on	the	formation	of	unconscious	contents	in	children.	Through	the
Word	Association	Experiment	he	found	strong	evidence	of	strikingly	similar
patterns	of	complex	formation	among	family	members—between	mothers
and	daughters,	fathers	and	sons,	and	mothers	and	sons,	for	example.	Of	these
combinations,	the	closest	were	mothers	and	daughters.	Their	responses	to	the
stimulus	words	revealed	nearly	identical	anxieties	and	conflicts.	From	this
Jung	concluded	that	the	unconscious	is	importantly	patterned	by	close
relationships	in	the	family	environment.	Exactly	how	this	takes	place	is	not
clear	from	his	work.	Is	it	by	some	sort	of	transmission?	Is	it	by	repetition	of
similar	traumas	passed	along	through	the	generations?	This	is	not	answered.
Later	in	a	child’s	development	these	early	psychic	structures	are	modified
significantly	by	exposure	to	the	wider	culture.	The	
psyche’s	constant	exposure
to	social	and	cultural	stimuli,	from	TV	and	school,	becomes	a	factor	in	later
stages	of	childhood,	and	this	reduces	the	psychological	influence	of	ethnic
and	family	cultures,	at	least	in	a	pluralistic	society	like	America’s.	When	the
peer	group	becomes	central,	it	generates	important	new	structural	elements,
many	of	them	based,	however,	on	commonly	available	cultural	patterns.	And
yet	the	early	family-induced	complexes	do	not	disappear	from	the	psyche.
The	mother	and	father	complexes	continue	to	dominate	the	scene	in	the
personal	unconscious.
13
	They	are	the	giants.
Psychic	Images

To	get	at	the	basic	structure	of	the	complex,	it	must	be	broken	down	into	its
parts.	“What	then,	scientifically	speaking,	is	a	‘feeling-toned	complex’?”	Jung
asks.	“It	is	the	image	of	a	certain	psychic	situation	which	is	strongly
accentuated	emotionally	and	is,	moreover,	incompatible	with	the	habitual
attitude	of	consciousness.”	
14
	The	word	“image”	is	key	here.	It	is	an
extremely	important	term	for	Jung.	Image	defines	the	essence	of	psyche.
Sometimes	Jung	uses	the	word	Latin	
imago
	rather	than	image	to	refer	to	a
complex.	The	“mother	imago”	is	the	mother	complex,	as	distinguished	from
the	actual	mother.	The	point	is	that	the	complex	is	an	image	and	as	such
belongs	essentially	to	the	subjective	world;	it	is	made	of	pure	psyche,	so	to
speak,	although	it	also	represents	an	actual	person,	experience,	or	situation.	It
should	not	be	mistaken	for	objective	reality—for	another	actual	person	or	a
material	body.	The	complex	is	an	inner	object,	and	at	its	core	it	is	an	image.
Surprisingly,	there	may	be	a	close	correspondence	between	a	psychic	image
and	external	reality,	even	when	no	chance	exists	that	the	psyche	has	been
imprinted	by	it	or	recorded	it	from	experience.	Konrad	Lorenz,	a	famous
ethologist,	studied	innate	reflex	responses	in	some	animals	in	reaction	to
specific	stimuli.	For	example,	chicks	who	had	never	been	exposed	to	chicken
hawks	knew	to	run	for	cover	when	a	chicken	hawk	flew	overhead	and	its
shadow	appeared	on	the	ground.	Using	devices	that	ran	on	wires	overhead
and	cast	shadows	resembling	the	chicken	hawk,	
ethologists	have	shown	that
untutored	chicks,	seeing	the	shadow,	will	run	for	cover.	The	defensive
response	to	a	predator	is	built	into	the	chick’s	system,	and	the	image	of	the
predator	is	innate	and	recognized	without	having	to	be	learned.
Complexes	operate	in	a	similar	way,	only	in	humans	they	seem	to	be	only
quasi-instinctive	rather	than	truly	instinctive.	They	act	like	instincts	in	that
they	produce	spontaneous	reactions	to	particular	situations	or	persons,	but
they	are	not	purely	innate	in	the	same	way	that	instincts	are.	Mostly	they	are
products	of	experience—trauma,	family	interactions	and	patterns,	cultural
conditioning.	These	are	combined	with	some	innate	elements,	which	Jung
called	archetypal	images,	to	make	up	the	total	package	of	the	complex.
Complexes	are	what	remain	in	the	psyche	after	it	has	digested	experience	and
reconstructed	it	into	inner	objects.	In	human	beings,	complexes	function	as
the	equivalent	of	instincts	in	other	mammals.	Imagoes,	or	complexes,	are,	in	a
manner	of	speaking,	constructed	human	instincts.
Dreams	are	made	out	of	these	unconscious	images,	the	complexes.	Jung
speaks	in	various	places	of	complexes	as	being	the	architects	of	dreams.	Over
a	period	of	time,	dreams	present	images,	patterns,	repetitions,	and	themes	that
give	us	a	picture	of	what	a	person’s	complexes	look	like.

“This	image	has	a	powerful	inner	coherence,	it	has	its	own	wholeness	and,
in	addition,	a	relatively	high	degree	of	autonomy,	so	that	it	is	subject	of	the
control	of	the	conscious	mind	to	only	a	limited	extent,	and	therefore	behaves
like	an	animated	foreign	body	in	the	sphere	of	consciousness.”
15
	Each	of
these	features	of	the	image—its	inner	coherence,	its	wholeness,	and	its
autonomy—are	important	aspects	of	Jung’s	definition	of	the	complex.	A
complex	possesses	psychic	solidity;	it	is	stable	and	endures	through	time.	Left
in	its	own	space	without	intervention	or	challenge	by	ego-consciousness,	a
complex	tends	not	to	change	very	much.	One	can	witness	this	in	repetitions	of
the	same	patterns	of	emotional	reaction	and	discharge,	the	same	mistakes,	the
same	unfortunate	choices	made	over	and	over	again	in	a	person’s	life.
Analysis	tries	to	uncover	the	complexes	and	expose	them	to	the	conscious
reflection	of	the	ego.	This	intervention	can	alter	them	
somewhat.	In	analysis	a
person	learns	how	the	complexes	function,	what	triggers	their	constellation,
and	what	can	prevent	their	endless	repetition.	Without	such	intervention	on
the	part	of	the	ego,	a	complex	will	behave	like	an	animated	foreign	body	or	an
infection.	In	the	grip	of	a	complex,	a	person	can	feel	quite	helpless	and
emotionally	out	of	control.
Generally,	the	psychological	effects	of	complex	constellations	perseverate
over	an	extended	period	of	time	after	the	stimulus	has	left	off	impacting	the
psyche.	“Certain	experimental	investigations	seem	to	indicate	that	[the
complex‘s]	intensity	or	activity	curve	has	a	wavelike	character	with	a
’wavelength’	of	hours,	days,	or	weeks.”
16
	The	stimulus	that	provokes	the
complex	may	be	slight	or	great,	of	long	or	short	duration,	but	its	effects	on	the
psyche	can	continue	for	extended	periods	of	time	and	can	come	into
consciousness	in	waves	of	emotion	or	anxiety.	One	of	the	signs	of	effective
psychotherapy	is	that	the	complex-induced	disturbances	perseverate	for
shorter	lengths	of	time	than	they	did	before.	A	more	rapid	recovery	from
complex-induced	disturbances	indicates	increased	ego	strength	and
integration	of	psychic	material,	as	well	as	decreased	power	in	the	complexes.
A	shortened	perseveration	time	means	that	the	complex’s	power	has
diminished.	Nevertheless,	it	must	be	recognized	that	a	complex	can	never	be
completely	eliminated.	The	wavelike	effects	of	complex	“after-shock”	are
exhausting	and	draining.	The	discharge	of	a	powerful	complex	can	consume
an	enormous	amount	of	psychic	and	physical	energy.
Personality	Fragments

The	complexes	can	be	thought	of,	too,	as	personality	fragments	or
subpersonalities.	Every	adult’s	personality	is	somewhat	vulnerable	to
disintegration	because	it	is	constructed	of	large	and	small	fragments.	These
can	come	unglued.	“My	findings	in	regard	to	complexes	corroborate	the
somewhat	disquieting	picture	of	the	possibilities	of	psychic	disintegration,	for
fundamentally	there	is	no	difference	in	principle	between	a	fragmentary
personality	and	a	complex.	They	have	all	the	essential	features	in	
common,
until	we	come	to	the	delicate	question	of	fragmented	consciousness.
Personality	fragments	undoubtedly	have	their	own	consciousness,	but	whether
such	small	psychic	fragments	as	complexes	are	also	capable	of	a
consciousness	of	their	own	is	a	still	unanswered	question.”
17
	Jung	is	here
raising	an	important	but	extremely	subtle	question	about	the	differences
between	normal	dissociation,	more	severe	dissociative	disorders,	and	multiple
personality	disorder.
Every	human	being	can	and	does	from	time	to	time	dissociate,	in	the	sense
of	experiencing	mild	altered	states	of	consciousness	or	splitting	off	from
traumatic	experience	in	order	to	keep	functioning.	Being	“in	complex”	is
itself	a	state	of	dissociation.	Ego-consciousness	becomes	disturbed	and,
depending	upon	the	extent	of	the	disturbance,	can	be	thrown	into	a	state	of
considerable	disorientation	and	confusion.	Since	complexes	possess	a	type	of
consciousness	in	their	own	right,	a	person	who	is	“in	complex”	is	in	a	sort	of
state	of	possession	by	an	alien	personality.	In	the	multiple	personality
disorder,	these	various	states	of	consciousness	are	not	held	together	by	a
unifying	consciousness,	and	the	ego	is	not	able	to	bridge	the	psychic	space
among	the	pieces.	In	this	case,	the	ego	is	restricted	to	fragments	of
consciousness,	while	each	other	complex	possesses	a	sort	of	ego	of	its	own,
each	operating	more	or	less	independently.	Each	has	its	own	identity	and	even
its	own	type	of	control	over	somatic	functions.	Some	studies	of	multiple
personalities	have	indicated	surprising	psyche-soma	connections	in	each	of
the	subpersonalities,	to	the	extent	that	one	personality	may	show	physical
capacities	or	difficulties	not	displayed	by	others.	One	personality	may	be
allergic	to	tobacco	smoke,	another	can	be	a	chain	smoker.
The	multiple	personality	represents	an	extreme	form	of	personality
dissociation.	The	integration	processes	normally	active	in	the	psyche	have
been	thwarted	by	severe	(usually	sexual)	childhood	trauma.	But	to	a	lesser
degree,	everyone	has	multiple	personalities,	because	everyone	has	complexes.
The	difference	lies	in	the	fact	that	complexes	are	as	a	rule	subordinated	to	an
integrated	ego,	and	ego-consciousness	is	maintained	when	a	complex	is
constellated.	In	general,	the	complexes	have	less	energy	than	the	ego	
has,	and

they	show	only	minimal	consciousness	of	their	own.	The	ego,	in	contrast,	has
considerable	energy	and	will	at	its	disposal,	and	it	is	the	primary	center	of
consciousness.
While	the	ego	is	responsible	for	much	of	what	we	call	motivation	and
purpose,	the	other	complexes	also	seem	to	have	a	separate	purpose	and	will.
Often	this	is	in	conflict	with	what	the	ego	complex	wants	at	a	particular
moment.	Jung	describes	complexes	as	“the	actors	in	our	dreams,	whom	we
confront	so	powerlessly;	they	are	the	elfin	beings	so	aptly	characterized	in
Danish	folklore	by	the	story	of	the	clergyman	who	tried	to	teach	the	Lord’s
prayer	to	two	elves.	They	took	the	greatest	pains	to	repeat	the	words	after	him
correctly,	but	at	the	very	first	sentence	they	could	not	avoid	saying:	‘Our
Father,	who	are	not	in	heaven’.	As	one	might	expect	on	theoretical	grounds,
these	impish	complexes	are	unteachable.”	
18
	The	moral	of	this	story	is	that
complexes	cannot	be	made	to	do	what	the	ego	wants	them	to	do.	They	are
intractable.	They	are	like	frozen	memory	images	of	traumatic	experiences.
And	they	are	not	experienced	only	in	dreams	but	in	everyday	life	as	well,
where	they	leave	the	ego	feeling	equally	powerless.
The	Structure	of	Complexes
Further	on	the	structure	of	the	complex,	Jung	describes	it	as	being	made	up	of
associated	images	and	frozen	memories	of	traumatic	moments	that	are	buried
in	the	unconscious	and	not	readily	available	for	retrieval	by	the	ego.	These	are
repressed	memories.	What	knits	the	various	associated	elements	of	the
complex	together	and	holds	them	in	place	is	emotion.	This	is	the	glue.
Furthermore,	“the	feeling-toned	content,	the	complex,	consists	of	a	nuclear
element	and	a	large	number	of	secondarily	constellated	associations.”
19
	
The
nuclear	element	is	the	core	image	and	experience	on	which	the	complex	is
based—the	frozen	memory.	But	this	core	turns	out	to	be	made	up	of	two
parts:	an	image	or	psychic	trace	of	the	originating	trauma	and	an	innate
(archetypal)	piece	closely	associated	to	it.	The	dual	core	of	the	complex
grows	by	gathering	associations	around	itself,	and	this	can	go	on	over	the
course	of	an	entire	lifetime.	If,	for	example,	a	man	reminds	a	woman	of	her
harsh,	
abusive	father	by	his	tone	of	voice,	by	his	way	of	reacting	to	life,	by	his
intensity	of	emotional	response,	and	so	on,	he	will	understandably	constellate
her	father	complex.	If	she	interacts	with	him	over	a	period	of	time,	material
will	be	added	to	that	complex.	If	he	abuses	her,	the	negative	father	complex

will	be	further	enriched	and	energized,	and	she	will	become	all	the	more
reactive	in	situations	where	the	father	complex	is	constellated.	Increasingly
she	may	avoid	such	men	entirely,	or	on	the	other	hand	she	may	find	herself
irrationally	drawn	to	them.	In	either	case,	her	life	becomes	more	and	more
restricted	by	this	complex.	The	stronger	the	complexes,	the	more	they	restrict
the	range	of	the	ego’s	freedom	of	choice.
That	complexes	can	be	modified	by	later	experience	is	of	course	to	the
benefit	of	the	individual,	and	the	healing	potential	of	psychotherapy	depends
upon	this.	Therapy	involves	a	kind	of	thawing	out	of	the	frozen	memory
images.	It	can	restructure	the	personality	to	some	extent	because	transference
allows	the	therapist	to	stand	in	for	(among	other	figures	of	the	psyche)	the
parents,	both	mother	and	father,	at	different	stages	of	therapy.	When	a
parental	complex	is	constellated	by	the	therapist,	the	patient’s	experience	of	a
different	kind	of	parent	figure	adds	material	to	the	old	complex	and	builds	a
new	layer	into,	or	over,	it.	This	new	structure	does	not	entirely	replace	the	old,
but	it	can	importantly	modify	it,	to	the	point	where	the	complex	no	longer
restricts	a	person’s	life	in	such	a	debilitating	way.	The	harshness	of	an	abusive
parent	imago	may	be	softened—thawed	out—or	offset	by	new	structures.
The	other	piece	of	the	complex’s	nuclear	core	is	“a	factor	innate	in	the
individual’s	character	and	determined	by	his	disposition.”	
20
	This	piece	is
archetypal.	In	the	case	of	parental	complexes,	for	instance,	it	is	an	archetypal
image	of	Mother	or	Father,	an	image	derived	not	from	personal	experience
but	from	the	collective	unconscious.	The	archetypal	elements	in	the
personality	are	innate	dispositions	to	react,	behave,	and	interact	in	certain
typical	and	predictable	ways.	They	are	similar	to	the	innate	release
mechanisms	of	animals.	They	are	inherited	and	not	acquired,	and	they	belong
to	each	human	being	by	virtue	of	being	
born	human.	They	are	what	make	us
uniquely	and	characteristically	human.	Not	only	the	body	but	also	the	soul—
the	psyche—is	specifically	human	and	creates	the	preconditions	for	all	later
experience,	development,	and	education.	I	will	expand	upon	Jung’s	theory	of
archetypes	in	later	chapters.	For	now	it	is	sufficient	to	recognize	that	the
archetypal	elements	of	the	psyche	are	experienced	in	everyday	life	through
the	experience	of	the	complexes.
Generally	speaking,	complexes	are	created	by	trauma.	Prior	to	the	trauma,
the	archetypal	piece	exists	as	an	image	and	a	motivating	force	but	does	not
have	the	same	disturbing	and	anxiety-producing	qualities	of	the	complex.	The
trauma	creates	an	emotionally	charged	memory	image	that	becomes
associated	with	an	archetypal	image,	and	together	these	freeze	into	a	more	or
less	permanent	structure.	This	structure	contains	a	specific	amount	of	energy,

and	with	this	it	can	tie	in	other	associated	images	to	create	a	network.	Thus	a
complex	becomes	enriched	and	extended	by	later	experiences	of	a	similar
sort.	But	not	all	traumas	are	of	an	external	nature	or	are	inflicted	by	abrasive
collisions	with	the	environment.	There	are	traumas	that	occur	mostly	internal
to	the	individual	psyche.	Jung	indicates	that	complexes	may	also	be	created	or
supplemented	by	a	“moral	conflict,	which	ultimately	derives	from	the
apparent	impossibility	of	affirming	the	whole	of	one’s	nature.”
21
Everchanging	moral	attitudes	in	our	society	make	it	impossible	to	affirm	our
wholeness	completely	in	many	situations.	We	have	to	deny	our	true	feelings
and	refrain	from	expressing	them	in	order	to	get	along	or,	occasionally,	even
to	survive.	Making	such	social	adjustments	for	the	sake	of	adaptation	creates
a	social	mask,	a	“persona,”	that	excludes	essential	parts	of	oneself.	In	general,
people	prefer	to	be	included	in	their	social	groups,	and	those	who	bluntly
speak	their	minds	or	do	not	conform	to	group	standards	tend	to	be	ostracized
or	marginalized.	This	social	dilemma	puts	a	person	into	what	Jung	calls	a
moral	conflict.	At	the	deepest	level,	the	imperative	is	to	be	whole.	Human
nature	rebels	against	the	strictures	of	society	and	culture	if	they	too	severely
inhibit	this	innate	drive	toward	wholeness,	and	this	is	a	further	source	of
complexes.
This	was	the	issue	that	Freud	took	up	in	Vienna,	a	society	that	was
officially	sexually	inhibited	but	also	quite	blatantly	hypocritical	about	its
sexual	mores.	Freud	demonstrated	how	the	conflicts	around	sexuality	become
rooted	in	psychological	patterns	and	produce	neurosis.	Sexuality,	which	is
built	into	the	innate	makeup	of	the	human	being,	becomes	socially
incompatible	and	is	therefore	split	off	from	consciousness	and	repressed.	This
creates	a	sexual	complex	around	which	related	traumas	cluster.
Fundamentally,	what	makes	the	repression	of	sexuality	the	source	of
pathology	is	the	insistent	imperative	of	the	human	organism	to	pursue	its
innate	wholeness,	which	includes	uninhibited	sexuality.	It	is	not	the	conflict
between	the	individual	and	society	per	se	that	produces	the	neurotic	problem,
as	Freud	argued,	but	the	moral	conflict	that	comes	about	in	a	psyche	that
wants	to	deny	itself	on	the	one	hand	but	is	forced	to	affirm	itself	on	the	other.
The	Eruption	of	Complexes
Complexes	have	the	ability	to	erupt	suddenly	and	spontaneously	into
consciousness	and	to	take	possession	of	the	ego’s	functions.	What	appears	as

utter	spontaneity,	however,	may	not	be	so	pure.	Often	there	is	a	subtle
triggering	stimulus	that	can	be	detected	if	one	looks	carefully	enough	into	the
recent	past.	A	neurotic	depression,	for	instance,	may	look	endogenous	until
one	finds	the	tiny	insult	that	set	it	off.	When	the	ego	is	possessed	in	this
fashion,	it	becomes	assimilated	to	the	complex	and	the	complex’s	purposes,
and	the	result	is	what	we	call	“acting	out.”	People	who	are	acting	out	are
often	not	aware	that	this	is	what	is	going	on.	They	are	simply	“in	a	mood,”
and	the	behavior	seems	congruent	with	the	ego.	But	this	is	the	nature	of
possession:	the	ego	is	deceived	into	thinking	that	it	is	freely	expressing	itself.
Only	in	retrospect	does	one	realize,	“Something	got	into	me	and	made	me	do
it.	I	didn’t	know	what	I	was	doing!”	If	another	person	tries	to	point	out	that
one	is	acting	out	of	character,	the	usual	response	is	angry	defensiveness.	The
person	in	a	state	of	possession	does	not	take	such	feedback	kindly.	Jung	says
that	in	the	Middle	Ages	this	identification	with	a	complex	“went	by	another
name;	it	was	called	possession.
Probably	no	one	imagines	this	state	as	being	particularly	harmless,	and	there
is	in	it	no	difference	in	principle	between	a	slip	of	the	tongue	caused	by	a
complex	and	the	wildest	blasphemies.”
22
	
The	difference	is	a	matter	of	degree.
There	are	degrees	of	possession,	from	the	momentary	and	slight	ones	to	the
psychotic	and	chronic	ones.	What	we	see	in	possession	is	that	features	of
personality	that	are	usually	not	a	part	of	the	ego’s	character	and	style	become
blatantly	manifest.	These	unknown	features	have	been	built	up	in	the
unconscious	over	a	period	of	time,	and	suddenly	the	ego	is	overcome	by	this
inner	opposite.	Now	the	person	is	possessed	by	the	devil	and	curses	the	things
that	consciousness	had	formerly	held	most	sacred.
People	with	Tourette’s	Syndrome	do	this	openly	on	a	continual	basis.	For	a
person	blessed	with	so-called	normal	psychology,	the	splinter	personalities
show	themselves	in	a	multitude	of	much	more	subtle	ways,	some	so	slight	as
to	be	nearly	undetectable—slips	of	the	tongue,	forgetfulness.	In	the	course	of
an	hour	one	may	pass	through	several	states	of	consciousness,	moods,
subpersonalities,	and	barely	notice	the	shifts.	This	subtlety	passes	into	more
gross	forms	as	we	approach	the	level	of	true	possession.	Possession	has	a
more	extreme	and	distinctive	quality.	It	is	hard	to	miss,	and	it	often	even
acquires	the	features	of	a	specific	character	type.	A	Savior	complex,	for
example,	typically	develops	from	painful	experiences	of	abandonment	in
childhood,	and	then	shows	itself	in	behavior	that	passes	for	kindness	and
helpfulness.	These	features	do	not,	however,	belong	to	the	ego	in	an
integrated	way;	rather	they	tend	to	wax	and	wane	because	they	are	rooted	in
an	autonomous	complex	over	which	the	ego	has	little	control.	These	are	the

people	who	cannot	refrain	from	being	helpful	and	enabling	no	matter	how
destructive	it	may	be	to	themselves	or	to	others.	The	behavior	is	actually
controlled	by	a	complex	and	is	therefore	not	under	ego	control.	It	also	tends	to
fluctuate	more	or	less	arbitrarily.	There	are	sudden	inconsistencies	that	cannot
be	anticipated	or	explained.	Sometimes	this	person	will	be	excessively
thoughtful	and	caring,	at	other	times	ruthless,	indifferent,	or	even	abusive.
Other	splinter	psyches	(complexes)	are	competing	for	the	ego’s	sponsorship.
When	a	possession-prone	ego	leaves	
off	identifying	with	one	complex,	it
shifts	to	another.	This	other	is	more	often	than	not	a	sort	of	shadow	brother	or
sister	of	the	first.	A	Christ-like	complex	with	its	spiritual,	upward-oriented,
giving,	altruistic	features	is	matched	by	a	Devilish	complex	with	an	attitude	of
materialism	and	selfishness.	The	two	may	alternate	in	taking	possession	of	the
ego,	Jekyll-and-Hyde-like.	The	one	will	function	as	the	official	persona	in
many	public	social	situations,	and	the	other	will	dominate	the	conscious
personality	in	private,	intimate	settings.	This	ego	is	vulnerable	to	what	Jung
called	“enantiodromia,”	a	reversal	into	the	opposite.
The	complexes	are	objects	of	the	inner	world.	“It	is	on	them	that	the	weal
and	woe	of	personal	life	depends.	They	are	the	
lares
	
and	
penates
	[the
household	gods]	who	await	us	at	the	fireside,	and	whose	peaceableness	it	is
dangerous	to	extol.”
23
	Such	deities	are	not	to	be	taken	lightly.

3
Psychic	Energy
(Libido	Theory)
T
hus	far	I	have	described	two	basic	structures	of	the	psyche—
egoconsciousness	and	the	complexes—as	Jung	conceived	and	wrote	about
them.	Now	I	will	consider	the	force	that	animates	these	structures	and	gives
them	life,	namely	
libido
.	This	is	desire	and	emotion,	the	life	blood	of	the
psyche.	Jung	called	libido	
psychic	energy.
	In	the	previous	two	chapters,	I	have
frequently	used	the	term	energy.	This	is	the	dynamic	feature	of	the	psyche.
Jung’s	theory	of	libido	conceptualizes,	in	an	abstract	way,	the	relationships
among	the	various	parts	of	the	psyche.	To	use	the	metaphor	of	the	psyche	as
solar	system,	this	chapter	is	about	physics	and	the	forces	that	affect	the
various	objects	in	this	universe.
In	a	general	philosophical	sense,	the	subject	of	psychic	energy	has	been
investigated	by	thinkers	throughout	the	ages.	It	is	not	something	new	and
modern	to	reflect	upon	questions	of	life	force,	the	will,	passion	and	emotion,
the	ebb	and	flow	of	interest	and	desire.	Philosophers	in	the	West	have
considered	such	matters	since	Heraclitus	and	Plato,	and	in	the	East	since	Lao-
tsu	and	Confucius.	In	recent	centuries,	philosophers	like	Schopenhauer,
Bergson,	and	Nietzsche	have	given	these	questions	central	attention.
Physicians,	too,	like	Anton	Mesmer	with	his	theory	of	a	
psychic	fluid	in	the
body,	began	to	pursue	the	subject	of	psychological	movement	and	motivation
in	more	empirical	and	quasi-scientific	ways.	The	famous	nineteenth-century
German	physician-philosopher	C.G.	Carus	speculated	extensively	and	in
depth	about	the	unconscious	as	a	source	of	energy	and	noted	its	extensive
influences	upon	the	conscious	mind.	Jung	cites	such	figures	as	these,	as	well
as	von	Hartmann,	Wundt,	Schiller,	and	Goethe,	as	precursors	to	his	own
thinking.	Although	Freud	was	the	modern	psychological	originator	of	the

term	libido	and	the	figure	to	whom	Jung	bows	in	his	psychoanalytic
discussions	of	libido	theory,	he	was	not	the	only	influence	upon	Jung	or	the
single	figure	to	whom	he	was	responding	in	his	extensive	writings	on	libido
and	psychic	energy.
A	position	on	the	nature	and	flow	of	psychic	energy	is,	in	fact,	fundamental
to	every	philosophy	of	human	nature	and	the	soul,	for	this	will	contain	the
author’s	views	on	motivation	and	on	the	dynamic	elements	in	life	that
separate	living	beings	from	the	dead.	The	distinction	between	movement	and
stasis	constitutes	a	basic	category	of	human	thought,	and	it	leads
spontaneously	to	wondering	what	accounts	for	the	difference	between	these
two	states	of	being.	Why	do	physical	bodies	move	in	space,	and	why	do	they
move	in	one	direction	rather	than	in	another?	In	physical	science	these
questions	lead	to	theories	of	causation	and	the	formulation	of	laws	of	motion,
like	the	law	of	gravity.	The	same	is	true	for	philosophy	and	psychology,
where	questions	of	causation,	motivation,	and	the	laws	governing	psychic
bodies	in	movement	are	equally	important.	In	psychology	it	becomes	a
question	of	the	soul	and	its	movement	and	of	its	power	to	move	other	objects.
Aristotle	pondered	this.	Psychic	energy	is	present	in	a	living	body	and	not	in	a
corpse;	it	is	present	in	all	waking	life	and	in	dream	life;	it	is	what	makes	the
difference	between	being	“on”	and	being	“off,”	to	use	an	electrical	metaphor.
But	what	is	it?
Sexuality	and	Libido
What	Schopenhauer	called	Will	and	presented	as	the	primal	motivator	of
human	activity	and	thought,	Freud	chose	to	call	libido.
With	this	choice	of	terminology,	he	emphasized	the	sensual,	pleasure-seeking
element	in	human	nature.	The	soul	for	Freud	is	essentially	qualified	by	sexual
energy.	The	Latin	word	
libido
	
suited	his	purposes	particularly	well	because	of
his	conviction	that	the	sexual	drive	lies	at	the	base	of	psychic	life	and	is	the
primary	source	of	the	psyche’s	movement.	Freud’s	libido	theory	became,	on
the	one	hand,	a	polite	way	to	talk	about	sexuality,	giving	sex	a	Latin	name	and
making	the	conversation	sound	somewhat	medical;	on	the	other	hand,	it	was	a
way	to	carry	on	a	quasi-scientific	and	abstract	discussion	about	how	sexuality
moves	and	motivates	a	person	to	engage	in	a	variety	of	different	activities	and
how	it	ends	up	in	some	instances	causing	neurotic	attitudes	and	behavior.

It	was	Freud’s	contention	that	sexuality	is	the	prime	motivator	of	most,	if
not	all,	mental	processes	and	behavior.	Libido	is	the	juice	that	turns	the
human	machine	on	and	makes	it	hum,	even	if	the	specific	activities	a	person
may	be	engaged	in,	like	playing	the	violin	or	counting	money,	do	not	look
particularly	sexual.	Sexuality	is	the	primary	motivator	of	even	those	human
activities,	as	well	as	the	primary	cause	of	the	psychological	conflicts	that	end
up	ensnaring	a	person	in	the	tangles	of	neurosis	and	severe	mental	illnesses
such	as	paranoia	and	schizophrenia.	In	the	final	analysis,	Freud	wanted	to
show,	all	manifestations	of	psychic	energy	in	individual	and	collective	life	can
be	assigned,	at	least	in	significant	part,	to	the	sexual	drive	and	its	sublimations
or	repressions.	Freud	was	particularly	intent	on	demonstrating	that	sexual
conflict	lay	at	the	base	of	all	neurotic	and	psychotic	illnesses.
Early	in	his	discussions	with	Freud	about	psychological	theory	and	clinical
practice,	Jung	showed	grave	reservations	about	the	primacy	of	sexuality	and
suggested	the	obvious	point	that	there	might	be	other	drives	active	in	human
life	as	well.	For	instance,	there	is	a	basic	drive	called	
hunger:
As	you	have	noticed,	it	is	possible	that	my	reservations	about	your	far-
reaching	views	are	due	to	lack	of	experience.	But	don’t	you	think	that
a	number	of	borderline	phenomena	might	be	considered	more
appropriately	in	terms	of	the	other	basic	drive,	
hunger:
	for	instance,
eating,	sucking	(predominantly	hunger),	kissing	(predominantly
sexuality)?
Two	complexes	existing	at	the	same	time	are	always	bound	to
coalesce	psychologically,	so	that	one	of	them	invariably	contains
constellated	aspects	of	the	other.
1
This	note	of	disagreement	appears	already	in	Jung’s	second	letter	to	Freud,
dated	October	23,	1906.	From	the	very	outset	of	this	collaboration,	Jung
evidently	had	doubts	and	reservations	about	Freud’s	insistence	on	the
centrality	of	sexual	conflict	in	psychopathology.	In	the	years	that	followed,
there	were	many	more	letters	and	numerous	published	exchanges	on	the
subject	of	drives	and	the	sources	of	psychic	energy,	and	Jung	went	back	and
forth	in	his	adherence	to	Freudian	doctrine.	“Under	the	impress	of	Freud’s
personality,”	Jung	would	write	many	years	later	in	his	autobiography,	“I	had,
as	far	as	possible,	cast	aside	my	own	judgments	and	repressed	my	criticisms.
That	was	the	prerequisite	for	collaborating	with	him.”
2
	At	times	in	his	early
writings,	Jung	sounds	like	a	true	reductionist	in	the	Freudian	mold.	And	yet	it
is	also	clear	from	the	written	record	that	he	never	became	an	uncritical
disciple	of	Freud’s,	even	though	he	may	have	held	back	in	his	disagreement

for	the	sake	of	smoothing	over	differences	and	potential	troublespots	in	the
relationship.
As	it	turned	out,	the	debate	over	how	to	conceptualize	psychic	energy	and
what	to	name	it	became	much	more	than	a	minor	technical	point.	While
Jung’s	early	divergent	views	may	have	seemed	somewhat	trivial	and	vague,
or	based	on	misunderstandings	of	what	Freud	meant	to	say,	the	implications
ran	deep	and	in	time	these	led	to	major	philosophical,	theoretical,	and	clinical
disagreements.	In	fact,	their	differences	on	the	subject	of	libido	turned	out	to
define	the	central	theoretical	point	of	division	between	them.	At	issue	was	the
conception	of	human	nature	and	the	meaning	of	human	consciousness.	In	the
early	years,	this	could	not	be	foreseen	with	the	clarity	that	hindsight	provides.
Jung	was	learning	as	he	went—from	Freud	and	also	from	his	patients	and
from	many	other	sources.
In	the	masterful	essay	“On	Psychic	Energy,”
3
	published	in	1928,	Jung
spells	out	his	fully	considered	position	on	the	subject	of	libido.	This	paper	is
the	primary	source	for	the	present	chapter.	By	the	time	he	wrote	it	in	the	mid-
1920s,	he	had	been	separated	
from	Freud	and	the	psychoanalytic	movement
for	more	than	a	decade.	This	essay	has	the	quality	of	cool	objectivity,	whereas
his	earlier	major	work	on	the	subject,	
Wandlungen	und	Symbole	der	Libido
(1912—13)	(translated	into	English	in	1916	by	Beatrice	Hinkle	as	
Psychology
of	the	Unconscious,
	by	which	title	I	refer	to	it	throughout	this	book),	was
hastily	assembled	and	bears	the	marks	of	feverish	creative	thinking	that	has
not	quite	settled	into	place.	In	that	earlier	work,	composed	while	he	was	still
in	close	communication	with	Freud	and	indeed	was	still	Freud’s	crown	prince
and	heir	apparent	as	president	of	the	International	Psychoanalytic
Association,	he	tackled	libido	theory	as	a	kind	of	side-issue,	but	it	became	the
centerpiece	before	he	was	finished.	I	will	consider	that	work	briefly	here,	as
historical	background,	before	going	on	to	describe	Jung’s	later	essay	on
psychic	energy.
In	a	letter	to	Freud,	dated	November	14,	1911,	Jung	wrote:
In	my	second	part	[
of	Psychology	of	the	Unconscious
]	I	have	got
down	to	a	fundamental	discussion	of	the	libido	theory.	That	passage	in
your	Schreber	analysis	where	you	ran	into	the	libido	problem	(loss	of
libido	=	loss	of	reality)	is	one	of	the	points	where	our	mental	paths
cross.	In	my	view	the	concept	of	libido	as	set	forth	in	the	
Three	Essays
needs	to	be	supplemented	by	the	genetic	factor	to	make	it	applicable
to	Dem[entia]	praec[ox].
4
Jung	is	referring	here	to	his	second	chapter	in	Part	II	of	
Psychology	of	the

Unconscious,
	“The	Conception	and	the	Genetic	Theory	of	Libido.”	In	this
chapter	he	discusses	the	question,	referred	to	in	the	letter	quoted	above,	of	the
relationship	between	libido	(as	sexually	defined	by	Freud	in	“Three	Essays	on
the	Theory	of	Sexuality”	in	1905)	and	the	
fonction	du	reel
	(a	term	used	by
French	psychiatrist	Pierre	Janet	for	ego-consciousness).	Does	the	latter	derive
from	the	former?	If	ego-consciousness	is	a	derivative	of	sexually	determined
attachments	to	objects,	then	it	would	follow	that	disturbances	of	sexuality
would	cause	disturbances	in	the	ego,	and	indeed	that	ego	disturbances	could
be	assumed	to	be	rooted	in	sexual	disturbances.	What	Freud	(and	Berlin
psychoanalyst	Karl	Abraham)	wanted	to	argue	was	that	the	severe
disturbances	in	the	ego,	in	psychosis	and	schizophrenia,	are	to	be	attributed	to
the	loss	of	sexual	interest	in	the	object	
world,	because	the	reality	function	and
attachments	to	objects	were	created	by	sexual	interest	in	the	first	place.	This
is	a	circular	argument,	however,	and	Jung	cogently	points	this	out.
5
	In	place
of	this,	he	offers	another	explanation	for	schizophrenia	and	psychosis,	but	one
that	would	lead	to	a	basic	revision	of	libido	theory.
Jung	starts	from	what	he	calls	a	genetic	instead	of	a	descriptive	position.
He	begins	with	a	broad	conception	of	libido	as	psychic	energy,	following
Schopenhauer’s	conception	of	Will.	“As	you	know,”	he	writes	somewhat
apologetically	to	Freud,	“I	always	have	to	proceed	from	the	outside	to	the
inside	and	from	the	whole	to	the	part.”
6
	From	this	broad	viewpoint,	sexual
libido	is	but	one	branch	of	the	more	general	Will	or	life	force.	This	general
stream	of	psychic	energy	has	several	branches,	and	in	the	history	of	human
evolution	some	of	these	branches	are	more	prominent	than	others	at	certain
points.	At	some	stages	of	human	development,	both	collective	and	individual,
sexual	libido	is	more	prominent	and	fundamental;	at	others,	it	is	less	so.
Moreover,	Jung	writes,	it	can	be	argued	that	activities	which	were	once
closely	related	to	sexuality	and	indeed	could	be	clearly	seen	as	derivative
from	the	sexual	instinct	have	become,	through	evolution	of	human
consciousness	and	culture,	separated	from	the	sexual	domain	to	such	a	great
extent	that	they	no	longer	have	any	relation	to	sexuality:
Thus	we	discover	the	first	instincts	of	art	in	animals	used	in	the
service	of	the	impulse	of	creation,	and	limited	to	the	breeding	season.
The	original	sexual	character	of	these	biological	institutions	became
lost	in	their	organic	fixation	and	functional	independence.	Even	if
there	can	be	no	doubt	about	the	sexual	origin	of	music,	still	it	would
be	a	poor,	unaesthetic	generalization	if	one	were	to	include	music	in
the	category	of	sexuality.	A	similar	nomenclature	would	then	lead	us
to	classify	the	cathedral	of	Cologne	as	mineralogy	because	it	is	built

of	stones.
7
It	was	obvious	to	Jung	that	not	all	expressions	of	psychic	activity	have	a
sexual	origin	or	purpose,	even	though	they	may	once	have	had	such
connections	in	the	primordial	history	of	the	human	race.	Taking	an
evolutionary	viewpoint,	Jung	then	speculates	
about	how	activities	that	had
once	been	sexual	in	meaning	and	intention	have	later	become	transformed
into	nonsexual	activities,	such	as	music	and	art.
The	Transformation	of	Psychic	Energy
How	is	psychic	energy	transformed	from	an	expression	of	simple	instinct,
from	the	discharge	of	a	powerful	impulse	(i.e.,	eating	because	one	is	hungry
or	copulating	because	one	feels	sexy)	to	cultural	expressions	and	endeavors
(i.e.,	haute	cuisine	or	music	making)?	When	do	these	activities	leave	off	being
“instinctual”	in	any	meaningful	sense	of	the	word	and	become	something	else
with	quite	different	meaning	and	intention?
Jung	argues	in	
Psychology	of	the	Unconscious
	that	this	transformation	of
energy	may	happen	by	virtue	of	the	human	mind’s	native	capacity	for	creating
analogies.	Humans	have	the	ability,	and	the	need,	to	think	in	metaphors,	and
this	may	lie	behind	this	process	of	transformation.	Thus	hunting,	for	instance,
is	like	
(gleich	wie)
	
finding	a	sexual	mate,	so	this	analogy	can	be	applied	and
used	in	order	to	generate	enthusiasm	and	excitement	about	hunting.	In	time
the	activity	of	hunting	develops	its	own	cultural	meanings	and	motivations
and	takes	on	a	life	of	its	own.	It	does	not	need	the	sexual	metaphor	any
longer,	and	so	sexuality	does	not	apply	to	it	so	concretely.	Yet	some	residues
of	a	strong	analogy	always	remain,	and	these	residues	allow	for	the	possibility
of	reductive	sexual	interpretations	of	contemporary	cultural	activities.
Due	to	the	tendency	to	create	analogies,	the	human	world	of	consciousness
and	culture	in	time	becomes	vastly	expanded:
It	appears	as	if,	by	this	means	of	phantastic	analogy	formation,	more
libido	would	gradually	become	desexualized,	because	increasingly
more	phantasy	correlates	were	put	in	the	place	of	the	primitive
achievement	of	the	sexual	libido.	With	this	an	enormous	broadening
of	the	world	idea	was	gradually	developed	because	new	objects	were
always	assimilated	as	sexual	symbols.
8

The	archaic	world	of	human	activity	and	consciousness	thus	became	over
millennia	more	sexualized,	but	was	also	de-sexualized	at	the	same	time:
sexualized	because	more	analogies	to	sexuality	
were	continually	being
created,	but	de-sexualized	because	these	analogies	became	more	and	more
remote	from	their	source.
Jung’s	insight	was	that	sexual	motives	and	thoughts	are	gradually	replaced
by	metaphors,	analogies,	and	symbols	in	the	conscious	and	unconscious	life
of	the	human	being.	The	sexual	motive	will	reappear	vividly	during
regressions	in	the	patient’s	mental	life,	however,	and	this	is	what	Freud’s
conceptions	are	based	on.	Up	to	this	point	in	the	argument,	Jung	is	filling	in
detail	and	adding	supporting	arguments	for	the	view	that	much	of	the	modern
human	adult’s	mental	life	derives	from	sexual	sources	even	if	it	no	longer	has
much	to	do	with	sexuality	per	se.	Such	differences	as	he	shows	from	Freudian
orthodoxy	to	this	point	would	not	have	constituted	heresy.	The	more	critical
part	was	to	come	later,	in	the	final	chapter	of	
Psychology	of	the	Unconscious
entitled	“The	Sacrifice,”	which	dealt	with	the	subject	of	incest.
In	his	autobiography,	Jung	recalls:
When	I	was	working	on	my	book	about	the	libido	and	approaching	the
end	of	the	chapter	“The	Sacrifice,”	I	knew	in	advance	that	its
publication	would	cost	my	friendship	with	Freud.	For	I	planned	to	set
down	in	it	my	own	conception	of	incest,	the	decisive	transformation	of
the	concept	of	libido	…	To	me	incest	signified	a	personal
complication	only	in	the	rarest	cases.	Usually	incest	has	a	highly
religious	aspect,	for	which	reason	the	incest	theme	plays	a	decisive
part	in	almost	all	cosmogonies	and	in	numerous	myths.	But	Freud
clung	to	the	literal	interpretation	of	it	and	could	not	grasp	the	spiritual
significance	of	incest	as	a	symbol.	I	knew	that	he	would	never	be	able
to	accept	any	of	my	ideas	on	this	subject.
9
Why	was	Jung’s	conception	of	incest	“the	decisive	transformation	of	the
concept	of	libido”?	It	was	because	he	deliteralized	the	incest	wish.	Freud	saw
in	the	incest	wish	an	unconscious	wish	to	have	the	actual	mother	sexually	in	a
literal	sense.	Jung,	on	the	other	hand,	interpreted	the	incest	wish	symbolically
as	a	general	longing	to	remain	in	the	paradise	of	childhood.	This	longing
becomes	more	pronounced	when	a	person	faces	a	daunting	challenge	in	life,
to	grow	up,	to	adapt	to	a	stress-filled	environment.	One	wants	to	climb	in	bed
and	pull	the	covers	over	one’s	head.	The	longed-for	“mother”	becomes,	in
Jung’s	symbolic	interpretation,	
the	desire	to	regress	to	infantile	dependence,
to	childhood,	to	unconsciousness	and	irresponsibility.	This	is	the	motivation

behind	much	drug	and	alcohol	addiction.	When	incest	fantasies	appeared	in
the	treatment	of	neurosis,	therefore,	Jung	would	interpret	them	as	resistances
to	adaptation	rather	than	as	the	appearance	of	actual	unconscious	wishes	or	of
childhood	memories	of	such	wishes.	The	practice	of	literal	incest	among
some	ancient	peoples,	like	the	Egyptian	pharaohs	for	example,	was
understood	by	Jung	to	be	religiously	symbolic,	stating	a	privileged	status	and
indicating	the	union	with	a	divine	source	of	energy.	It	was	marriage	to	the
Mother-as-origin-of-life,	not	a	wish-fulfillment	of	literal	sexual	desire.
Actually,	Jung	argued,	sexuality	has	little	to	do	with	incest.	Incest	is
symbolically	significant,	not	biologically	desired.
This	kind	of	symbolic	interpretation	of	psychological	themes	and	images
set	Freud’s	teeth	on	edge.	Over	against	his	doctrines,	Jung	held	that	libido
does	not	consist	simply	of	sexual	desire	for	specific	objects,	nor	is	it	to	be
conceived	as	a	kind	of	inner	pressure	that	seeks	to	discharge	itself	by
attaching	to	(“cathecting”	is	the	pretentious	psychoanalytic	term)	fixed-upon
love	objects.	Libido	is	“will.”	Jung	is	bowing	to	Schopenhauer	here.	But,
Jung	continues,	will	is	divided	into	two	parts,	a	will	to	life	and	a	will	to	death:
“In	the	first	half	of	life	[the	libido’s]	will	is	for	growth,	in	the	second	half	of
life	it	hints,	softly	at	first,	and	then	audibly,	at	its	will	for	death.”
10
Amazingly,	this	reference	to	divided	libido	and	to	a	death	wish	precedes
Freud’s	theory	of	a	death	wish	by	roughly	a	decade	and	owes	its	source	most
probably	to	Jung’s	collaboration	with	Sabina	Spielrein,	who	was	his	student	at
the	time.	It	should	be	noted	that	Jung	deleted	this	phrasing	from	his	text	when
he	revised	it	in	1952	in	the	work	entitled	
Symbols	of	Transformation.
11
	By
that	time,	he	had	dropped	Spielrein	from	his	theory	and	no	longer	espoused
the	notion	of	a	death	instinct.
The	theme	of	sacrifice	that	Jung	dwells	upon	at	length	in	
Psychology	of	the
Unconscious
	is	a	centerpiece	in	his	thoughts	about	the	growth	of
consciousness	and	the	needs	of	the	human	personality	to	develop	maturity.
Were	humans	to	stay	in	bondage	to	incestuous	desire	and	behavior,
symbolically	speaking,	there	
would	be	no	psychic	movement	out	of
childhood.	Paradise	would	be	home.	At	the	same	time,	the	human	species
would	fail	to	thrive	because	adaptation	to	harsh	and	demanding	environments
could	not	occur.	The	incest	wish	for	eternal	childhood	had	to	be	sacrificed
collectively	in	primordial	times,	and	it	has	to	be	sacrificed	individually	by
every	modern	person,	in	order	to	promote	movement	in	consciousness	toward
greater	consciousness.	And	for	Jung	this	movement	toward	psychological
maturity	comes	about	naturally	through	internal	mechanisms	and	dynamics.	It
does	not	have	to	be	induced	by	outer	threats.	The	great	sacrifice	of	incest	is

made	voluntarily,	not	(as	taught	by	Freudian	theory)	because	of	threats	of
castration.	Freud’s	theory	of	patricide	or	atonement	for	guilt	as	the	basis	of
conscience	was	alien	to	Jung’s	way	of	thinking.	Humans	develop	conscience,
morality,	and	culture	naturally,	as	part	of	their	nature.	Culture	is	therefore
natural	to	the	human	species.
In	
Psychology	of	the	Unconscious
,	Jung	argues	the	general	point	that	the
transformation	of	libido	comes	about	not	through	a	conflict	between	the
sexual	drive	and	external	reality	but	rather	through	the	intervention	of	a
mechanism	within	human	nature	itself.	This	mechanism	produces	the
sacrifice	of	incest	for	the	sake	of	development.	It	can	be	seen	at	work	in	many
religions,	notably	in	Mithraism	and	Christianity,	which	Jung	compares	here	at
some	length.
At	this	point	in	his	career,	Jung	had	not	yet	conceptualized	the	archetype	as
a	force	that	structures	the	psyche	and	psychic	energy.	This	would	come	later
and	would	then	allow	him	to	achieve	much	greater	specificity	in	tracing	the
various	transformations	within	the	instinctual	base.	When	he	produced	the
extensive	revision	of	the	1912—13	text	in	1952,	published	as	
Symbols	of
Transformation,
	
he	inserted	archetypal	theory	in	many	places	in	order	to
achieve	precisely	this	type	of	specification.	In	1913,	however,	he	was	limited
theoretically	and	could	only	speak	vaguely	about	the	notion	that	there	is	a
natural	movement	toward	sacrifice	of	instinctual	gratification,	innate	to	the
human	psychic	system,	without	which	culture	and	human	consciousness	as
we	know	it	would	not	be	possible.	Sacrifice	accounts	for	the	transformation	of
energy	from	
one	form	of	expression	and	activity	to	another,	but	it	remained
unclear	at	that	time	what	motivates	humans	to	make	such	extraordinary
sacrifices.
12
	Furthermore,	there	is	the	question	of	what	directs	energy	along
particular	pathways	to	specific	occupations	and	endeavors.	A	key	insight
would	be	the	capacity	for	
symbols
	to	transform	and	direct	libido.
In	taking	the	position	on	instinct	and	libido	that	he	did,	Jung	knew	that	his
days	as	Freud’s	heir	and	crown	prince	were	numbered.	Freud	was	not	one	to
tolerate	wide	differences	of	opinion	among	his	followers.	Authority	was	at
stake	here,	and	Freud	would	demand	an	intellectual	kowtow.	Jung	balked	on
this	point,	and	this	was	the	psychological	nub	of	their	bitter	separation.
13
And	so	it	did	indeed	come	to	pass	that	Jung’s	collegial	relationship	with
Freud	ended	within	months	of	the	publication	of	Part	II	of	
Psychology	of	the
Unconscious.
	The	publication	date	was	September	1912,	when	the	material
appeared	in	the	sixth	volume	of	
Jahrbuch	für	psychoanalytische	und
psychopathologische	Forschungen
,	of	which	Jung	was	the	general	editor.	For

Jung,	the	whole	point	of	differing	with	Freud	on	the	definition	and	conception
of	libido	was	to	avoid	his	severe	type	of	reductionism	that	considers	every
manifestation	of	conscious	life	and	cultural	activity	to	be	assignable	to
sexuality	in	one	or	another	of	its	variety	of	flavors.	For	Freud,	the	point	of
insisting	on	the	centrality	of	sexuality	was	to	retain	the	edge	of
psychoanalytic	insight	into	how	the	civilized	human	being	avoids	truth	and
suffers	from	having	to	deal	so	deviously	with	sexuality.	In	addition,	Jung	was
aiming	for	the	creation	of	a	general	theory	of	energy	and	for	a	general
psychology,	while	Freud	was	intent	on	burrowing	ever	deeper	into	the
distortions	and	subterfuges	of	psychological	life	as	regards	sexuality	and
(later)	destructiveness	and	the	death	wish.
By	1928,	when	he	published	“On	Psychic	Energy,”	Jung	had	been	thinking
about	this	subject	for	twenty	years.	His	detailed	argument	and	references	to
various	authorities	in	this	essay	still	reflect	his	disagreement	with	Freud	and
psychoanalysis,	but	they	also	represent	his	desire	to	present	the	strongest
possible	case	for	a	general	view	of	libido	as	psychic	energy.
Physics	as	a	Model
Physics,	with	which	Jung	was	not	technically	familiar	in	any	great	detail	but
which	was	very	much	in	the	air	around	him	in	the	Zurich	of	the	early
twentieth	century,	provided	a	model	for	thinking	about	psychic	energy.	For
Jung	it	was	a	metaphor	that	offered	possibilities	for	formulating	a	similar	set
of	understandings	for	psychic	energy.	Physics	had	constructed	an	elaborate
theory	of	energy,	with	laws	of	causality,	entropy,	conservation	of	energy,
transformation,	and	so	on.	Looking	to	these	laws	of	physics	and	leaving	out
the	mathematical	formulas	and	equations,	Jung	set	out	to	conceptualize	the
psyche	in	a	manner	that	reminds	one	somewhat	of	his	earlier	work	in
experimental	psychology	with	the	Word	Association	Experiment.	Jung	points
out	that	when	dealing	with	energy	one	is	drawn	to	quantification.
14
Energy	is	an	abstraction	from	the	object	world,	he	writes.	One	cannot	see,
touch,	or	taste	it.	To	speak	of	energy	is	to	be	concerned	with	the	relation
between	objects	rather	than	with	the	objects	themselves.	Gravity,	for	example,
describes	the	way	one	object	affects	another	but	says	nothing	specifically
about	the	quality	of	the	objects	in	question.	Similarly,	Jung	argues,	a	theory	of
psychic	energy,	or	libido,	should	account	for	how	objects	in	the	psychic	world
affect	one	another.

Jung	argues	that	energy	is	finalistic	and	has	to	do	with	the	transfer	of
motion	or	momentum	among	(psychic)	objects	as	they	move	irreversibly
along	a	gradient	and	end	up	in	a	state	of	equilibrium.	This	resembles	a
description	of	a	physical	chain	of	events:	as	one	object	bumps	into	another,
the	first	is	slowed	and	the	momentum	of	the	second	is	increased.	The	law	of
conservation	of	energy	is	applied	to	this	sequence,	which	says	that	energy	can
neither	be	created	nor	destroyed,	so	the	amount	of	energy	that	leaves	the	first
object	must	equal	the	amount	of	energy	received	by	the	second.	This	can	be
precisely	measured.	Thus,	while	energy	is	abstract	and	intangible,	its	effects
are	observable,	as	anyone	who	plays	pool	knows.	Jung	applied	this	model	to
the	psyche,	and	this	essay	is	about	measuring	psychic	energy	and	thinking
about	psychic	life	in	terms	of	energy	transfers	and	movements.
“Empathy	leads	to	the	mechanistic	view,	abstraction	to	the	energic	view,”
15
Jung	writes,	and	goes	on	to	contrast	a	mechanistic	with	an	energic	view	of
physical	and	psychic	reality.	The	perspectives	are	incompatible,	yet	both	are
true.	“The	causal-mechanistic	view	sees	the	sequence	of	facts,	a-b-c-d,	as
follows:	a	causes	b,	b	causes	c,	and	so	on,”
16
	its	focus	being	on	causation.
This	ball	hits	a	second	one,	which	hits	the	third.	The	first	collision	causes	an
effect,	which	causes	another	effect,	and	so	on.	Effects	are	thus	traced	back	to
an	initial	cause.	“Here	the	concept	of	effect	appears	as	the	designation	of	a
quality,	as	a	‘virtue’	of	the	cause,	in	other	words,	as	a	dynamism.”
17
	Applying
this	perspective	to	psychological	life,	a	complex	is	seen	as	caused	by	a
trauma.	The	force	of	the	trauma	enters	the	psychic	system,	causing	a	series	of
effects	that	continue	to	manifest	for	many	years	in	the	form	of	symptoms.
From	a	mechanistic	perspective,	the	trauma	is	regarded	as	the	causal	origin	of
the	complex.	And	this	understanding	leads	to	empathy	for	the	traumatized
one.
“The	
final-energic
	view,	on	the	other	hand,”	Jung	writes,	“sees	the
sequence	thus:	
a-b-c
	are	means	towards	the	transformation	of	energy,	which
flows	causelessly	from	
a,
	the	improbable	state,	entropically	to	
b-c
	and	so	to
the	probable	state	
d
.	Here	a	causal	effect	is	totally	disregarded,	since	only
intensities	of	effect	are	taken	into	account.	Insofar	as	the	intensities	are	the
same,	we	could	just	as	well	put	
w-x-y-z
	instead	of	
a-b-c-d.”
18
	From	a	final-
energic	point	of	view,	energy	is	transferred	from	a	less	probable	to	a	more
probable	state	by	moving	along	a	gradient	of	intensities	until	it	ends	up	in
equilibrium.	Applying	that	perspective	to	psychological	life—and	here	one
comes	to	understand	why	Jung	called	this	an	abstract	and	not	an	empathic
view—wherever	one	ends	up	in	life,	psychologically	or	emotionally	speaking,
is	where	the	intensity	of	gradients	has	led	in	order	to	achieve	a	state	of

equilibrium.	Equilibrium	is	the	aim,	and	in	that	sense	it	is	the	cause,	a	final
cause,	that	draws	a	chain	of	events	to	itself.	It	is	a	“just	so”	story.	Causation
seems	like	personal	destiny.
19
For	whatever	reason—whether	pushed	from	the	behind	or	drawn	forward
to	a	goal	in	the	future—energy	moves.	According	to	the	physical	law	of
entropy,	energy	flows	from	higher	to	lower	
levels,	from	less	to	more	probable
states	of	intensity;	according	to	the	law	of	negentropy,	on	the	other	hand,	it
moves	toward	states	of	greater	complexity.	The	energic	viewpoint	sees	the
final	state	as	the	most	important	fact,	while	the	mechanistic-causal
perspective	focuses	on	the	initial	impetus	that	sent	energy	into	the	system	in
the	first	place.	Neither	perspective	finds	outcomes	to	be	random	or
unpredictable.	And	both	are	potentially	scientific.
It	should	be	noted	that	Jung	is	not	dealing	here	with	questions	of	ultimate
purpose	or	meaning.	Often	accused	of	being	a	mystic,	he	was	especially
sensitive	to	the	dangers	of	projecting	purpose	and	meaning	into	natural
processes.	He	does	not	regard	the	final-energic	view	as	teleological,	in	the
religious	sense	of	natural	and	historical	processes	aiming	for	and	seeking	a
meaningful	spiritual	conclusion.	He	is	simply	speaking	here	of	a	viewpoint
that	observes	the	transfer	of	energy	from	less	probable	to	more	probable
states.	Questions	like:	Is	there	a	designer	behind	the	design?	Does	God
control	and	guide	energy	and	lead	it	to	preordained	conclusions	and	goals?
are	interesting	metaphysically,	but	Jung	did	not	wish	to	address	such	issues
here.	He	is	merely	speaking	of	the	transfer	of	energy	from	one	level	to
another.
While	his	psychological	theory	is	finalistic	in	important	ways,	Jung	also
tried	to	create	a	synthesis	between	causal	and	final	perspectives.	He	thought
that	the	disagreement	between	Freud	and	Adler	could	be	attributed	to	the
difference	between	a	causal	and	a	finalistic	psychology.	While	Freud’s
psychology	(extroverted)	searches	out	causes,	Adler’s	finalistic	psychology
(introverted)	looks	at	end	points.	Adler	assumed	that	a	person’s	present	life
situation,	no	matter	what	it	might	be,	was	constructed	to	fit	the	individual’s
personal	needs	and	preferences	in	some	way.	Adler’s	finalistic-energic	view
conflicted	absolutely	with	Freud’s	mechanistic-causal	position.	Jung	was
looking	for	a	middle	ground,	for	a	position	that	could	take	both	perspectives
into	account.
20
Causal-mechanistic	models	and	finalistic	models	begin	with	a	different
premise	concerning	original	energy	states.	The	causal-mechanistic	model
starts	with	an	assumption	of	original	stasis.	At	the	beginning	nothing	has

happened	yet,	and	nothing	will	happen	
until	something	intervenes	from
outside	the	system	and	gives	it	a	boost	of	energy.	Someone	gives	a	ball	a
shove,	it	hits	another,	and	so	a	chain	of	events	is	set	in	motion.	The	finalistic-
energic	position,	on	the	other	hand,	assumes	a	highly	energized	state	at	the
beginning,	and	from	this	there	emerge	patterns	of	movement	as	energy	seeks
more	probable	states,	finally	achieving	balance	and	stasis.	Complexes—Jung
would	say,	for	example—possess	a	specific	quantum	of	energy,	and	this	can
result	in	movement	if	the	psychic	system	is	in	disequilibrium.	Complexes	are
not	only	reactive,	then,	but	at	times	they	can	also	be	creative.	If	complexes
were	not	proactive	and	creative	but	only	reactive,	they	could	not	be
considered	autonomous	in	any	strong	sense	of	the	word.	Under	certain
conditions,	they	will	press	into	ego	consciousness	with	a	fantasy	or	a	desire	or
thought	that	is	quite	unprovoked	by	the	environment.	The	environmental
stimulus	simply	invites	or	releases	the	energy	that	is	bound	up	in	the	complex.
Finalistically	seen,	the	complex	would	be	seen	as	seeking	to	discharge	its
energy	and	to	return	to	a	lower	energy	level.	It	does	this	by	introducing	into
the	conscious	subject	a	thought,	a	feeling	or	mood,	or	fantasy,	and	this	may
lead	the	person	to	behave	in	a	certain	way.	When	the	discharge	of	energy	has
been	completed,	it	settles	back	to	a	more	latent	state	in	the	unconscious	and
awaits	either	the	build-up	of	more	energy	from	within	the	intrapsychic	system
or	constellation	by	an	outer	stimulus.
The	Source	of	Energy
In	the	essay	“On	Psychic	Energy,”	Jung	does	not	go	into	detail	on	the	specific
sources	of	a	complex’s	energy.	He	states	only	that	psychic	energy	gets
distributed	among	the	various	components	of	the	psyche,	and	he	is	interested
in	studying	how,	using	the	energic	viewpoint,	one	can	track	the	distribution	of
energy	from	one	state	to	another.	His	questions	are:	How	does	energy	move
about	within	the	psyche?	Why	are	some	complexes	more	energized	than
others,	or	sometimes	more	energized	than	at	other	times?	How	does
instinctual	energy,	which	has	its	source	in	the	biological	base	of	the	psyche,
get	transformed	into	other	activities?
A	complex	collects	new	psychic	energy	to	itself	in	two	ways:	from	new
traumas	that	become	associated	with	it	and	enrich	it	with	more	material,	and
from	the	magnetic	power	of	its	archetypal	core.	This	core	attracts	its	energy
from	two	sources.	It	is	fed	with	energy	on	the	one	hand	by	the	instinct	with

which	it	is	affiliated.	Instincts	and	archetypes	are	two	sides	of	a	single	coin	in
the	psyche,	as	I	will	discuss	in	detail	in	the	next	chapter.	The	archetypal
image,	therefore,	acts	as	an	attractor	of	energy	as	it	becomes	available	to	the
psyche	from	the	biological	base	(through	a	process	that	Jung	calls
psychization).
	On	the	other	hand,	archetypes	also	attract	energy	from	other
sources.	They	tune	into	culture,	to	exchanges	with	other	people,	even	to	spirit
itself,	as	Jung	will	say	in	his	later	essay,	“On	the	Nature	of	the	Psyche.”	The
psyche	is	by	no	means	a	closed	system.	Rather	it	is	open	to	the	world	through
the	body	and	through	the	spirit.
The	irruption	of	a	complex	into	consciousness	indicates	that	it	has	become
temporarily	more	energized	than	the	ego.	Its	energy	flows	from	the	complex
into	the	ego	system	and	may	flood	and	possess	it.	Whether	or	not	the	ego	can
manage	to	contain	this	influx	of	energy	is	an	important	practical	question.
How	can	the	ego	channel	and	use	what	at	times	seems	like	a	tremendous
flood	of	unruly	energy?	The	key	lies	with	the	ego,	which	can	choose,	if	it	is
strong	and	determined	enough,	to	direct	this	influx	of	energy	into	the	creation
of	structure,	boundaries,	or	projects,	for	example.	Otherwise	a	person	may
simply	become	emotionally	overwrought	and	dysfunctional.
For	Jung,	then,	the	psyche	was	not	conceived	as	a	closed	energy	system.
Closed	systems	move	toward	entropy,	and	absolutely	closed	systems	stabilize
in	a	totally	static	final	state.	Jung	believed	that	the	psychic	system	is	only
relatively	closed.	The	healthy	psyche	is	somewhat	closed	and	does	show	a
tendency	toward	entropy,	but	it	is	also	open	in	that	it	is	fed	and	influenced	by
the	surrounding	world.	Tightly	closed	psychic	systems	are	pathological.
Those	are	often	so	sealed	off	from	outer	influences	that	they	do	not	yield	to
psychotherapy.	Paranoid	schizophrenia,	for	instance,	is	such	a	tightly	locked
psychic	system,	and	it	ends	
in	total	stasis	with	rigidly	frozen	ideas	and
attitudes	and	increased	isolation.	Only	biological	treatment	can	influence	it.
In	a	healthy	personality,	psychic	energy	also	follows	the	law	of	entropy	to
some	extent.	Over	time	there	is	a	tendency	toward	conservatism	and	gradual
stasis.	Change	becomes	more	difficult	as	one	ages.	The	polarities	in	the
psyche,	which	generate	energy	through	their	vigorous	interaction,	approach	a
position	of	stability	and	accommodation.	This	fact	would	indicate	that	the
normal	psychic	system	is	only	relatively	open	and	somewhat	closed.	Energy
distribution	tends	to	move	from	high	to	lower	levels,	analogous	to	water
falling	to	the	lowest	level	it	can	reach.

Measurement	of	Psychic	Energy
Jung	wonders	in	this	essay	how	such	energy	states	could	be	measured
scientifically.	He	suggests	that	this	could	be	done	by	estimating	
values
.	The
amount	of	value	placed	on	an	attitude	or	activity	indicates	the	intensity	level
of	energy.	Quantifying	that,	however,	presents	difficulties.	If	one	were	to
make	an	inventory	of	one’s	conscious	contents	and	preoccupations—politics,
religion,	money,	sex,	career,	relationships,	family—and	put	an	estimate	of
value	on	each	item,	using	a	scale	of	1	to	100,	one	would	have	a	sense	of	how
energy	is	distributed	among	the	contents	of	consciousness.	Obviously	this
fluctuates	day	by	day,	year	by	year,	decade	by	decade.	And	how	does	one
really	know	how	much	something	is	valued	by	the	psyche?	It	is	easy	to	fool
oneself.	An	inventory	of	conscious	contents	can	be	rated	on	a	scale,	but	one
cannot	be	certain	of	the	accuracy	of	these	ratings	until	they	are	put	to	the	test.
Only	when	choices	are	forced	between	two	or	more	attractive	things	does	a
person	actually	become	certain	of	what	the	relative	values	are.	An	alcoholic
who	is	forced	to	choose	between	more	boozing	and	a	wife	and	family	will	be
hard	pressed	to	commit	himself,	but	such	a	crisis	will	test	his	promise	never	to
drink	again.	Spending	habits	can	provide	important	clues	to	one’s	actual,	as
opposed	one’s	supposed,	values.	The	flow	of	money,	which	symbolizes
energy,	is	a	way	of	showing	where	value	intensity	lies.	People	voluntarily
spend	money	for	what	they	value	highly.
These	are	some	of	the	ways	in	which	the	energy	values	of	conscious
contents	can	be	measured.	But	what	about	the	values	of	unconscious
contents?	How	can	these	be	measured?	This	cannot	be	accomplished	by
introspection	alone	because	the	ego	cannot	ordinarily	penetrate	far	enough
into	the	unconscious	depths.	Complexes	will	make	choices	that	the	ego	would
not	make.	An	indirect	method	of	measurement	is	necessary,	and	for	Jung	the
Word	Association	Experiment	provided	such	a	method.	A	complex’s	energy
level	is	indicated	by	the	number	of	complex	indicators	associated	to	it.	Once
this	is	known,	an	estimate	can	be	made	of	its	energy	potential.	Over	time,	too,
one	learns	experientially	which	complexes	generate	the	most	intense
emotional	reactions.	These	sensitive	areas	are	better	not	exposed	in	public	and
in	polite	society	because	of	one’s	predictably	intense	reactions.	Some
collective	complexes,	circling	around	issues	of	sex,	religion,	money,	or	power
affect	almost	everyone	to	some	degree	and	can	lead	to	fierce	discharges	of
energy,	even	to	war,	if	provoked	severely	enough.	The	intensity	and
frequency	of	disturbances	in	daily	life	are	useful	indicators	of	the	energy

levels	of	the	unconscious	complexes.	The	energy	level	of	a	psychic	content
may	be	indicated	by	either	positive	or	negative	emotions	and	reactions.	From
an	energic	point	of	view,	this	distinction	in	feeling	makes	no	difference.
The	Unity	of	Body	and	Mind
Psychic	energy—Jung	repeats	in	this	essay	what	he	said	some	fifteen	years
earlier	in	
Psychology	of	the	Unconscious
—is	a	subcategory	of	life	energy.
Some	people	simply	have	a	great	deal	of	it,	while	others	have	less.	It	was	said
that	Lyndon	Johnson,	for	example,	seemed	to	have	more	glands	than	anybody
else	around.	He	could	overwhelm	people	with	his	sheer	energy.	As	a	senator,
he	wrote	250	letters	a	day	to	constituents	while	carrying	out	his	regular	duties
as	majority	leader.	Some	people	have	a	tremendous	amount	of	raw	energy
while	others	can	barely	get	from	bed	to	the	breakfast	table.	In	a	sense,	the
physical	side	of	life	strongly	affects	the	psychological,	and	feeling	healthy
physically	contributes	to	one’s	reservoir	of	psychic	energy.	But	the	relation
between	psyche	
and	body	is	complex	and	often	paradoxical.	Nietzsche,	for
example,	was	extremely	ill	and	in	severe	pain	while	writing	his	poetic
masterpiece,	Also	
Sprach	Zarathustra.
	Heinrich	Heine	spent	the	last	ten	years
of	his	life	in	bed	in	physical	agony,	and	yet	he	composed	hundreds	of	songs
and	poems	and	other	literary	works	of	the	highest	caliber	during	this	period.
The	immense	amounts	of	psychic	energy	needed	for	these	efforts	of	genius
cannot	be	accounted	for	by	using	the	simple	notion	that	a	healthy	body
produces	the	psychic	energy	that	is	available	for	work.	There	is	more	going
on	than	a	simple	transfer	of	calories	from	soma	to	soul	and	mind.
Because	of	conundrums	such	as	these,	some	thinkers	have	regarded	the
physical	and	psychological	as	two	relatively	independent	parallel	systems.
This	has	the	virtue	of	preserving	the	integrity	of	each	system	and	denying	the
reduction	of	psychic	energy	to	physical	energy.	But	Jung	was	not	content	with
that	model,	even	while	he	strongly	opposed	biological	reductionism.	He
affirmed	that	there	are	two	systems,	but	their	interaction	is	so	intricate	and
complex,	and	for	the	most	part	buried	so	deeply	in	the	unconscious,	that	it	is
difficult	to	define	where	one	begins	and	the	other	leaves	off.	In	some	ways
they	are	independent,	but	in	others	they	are	deeply	interconnected	and	seem
dependent	on	one	another.	The	mind/body	issue	appears	many	times	in	Jung’s
writings,	and	I	will	touch	on	it	again	in	later	chapters.	In	the	essay	“On
Psychic	Energy”	he	merely	alludes	to	the	problem.

Since	the	psyche-soma	unity	is	only	a	relatively	and	not	an	absolutely
closed	system,	neither	entropy	nor	conservation	of	energy	operates	in	it
precisely.	Practically	speaking,	however,	there	is	a	strong	correlation.	If	one’s
interest	in	one	thing	diminishes	or	vanishes,	that	same	amount	of	energy	often
appears	somewhere	else.	The	two	objects	of	interest	might	not	be	related	in
any	apparent	way,	but	the	total	amount	of	energy	in	the	system	remains
constant.	On	the	other	hand,	a	great	deal	of	energy	sometimes	vanishes
completely.	A	person	becomes	lethargic	or	depressed.	In	this	instance,	Jung
says,	the	energy	has	gone	into	regression.	It	has	drained	out	of	consciousness
and	returned	to	the	unconscious.
Energy,	Movement,	and	Direction
Regression
	and	
progression
	of	libido	are	important	terms	in	Jung’s	theory.
They	refer	to	directions	of	energy	movement.	In	progression,	libido	is	utilized
for	adaptation	to	life	and	the	world.	The	person	uses	it	for	functioning	in	the
world	and	can	spend	it	freely	on	chosen	activities.	This	person	is	experiencing
a	positive	flow	of	psychic	energy.	But	suppose	this	person	fails	an	important
exam,	or	gets	shunted	aside	in	a	corporate	shake-up,	or	loses	a	beloved	mate
or	a	child.	Progression	of	libido	may	come	to	a	stop,	life	ceases	its	forward
momentum,	and	the	flow	of	energy	reverses	direction.	It	goes	into	regression
and	disappears	into	the	unconscious,	where	it	activates	complexes.	This	may
lead	to	splitting	apart	polarities	that	were	once	linked;	they	now	become
warring	opposites.	Now	ego-consciousness	may	have	one	set	of	principles
and	values,	while	the	unconscious	takes	up	a	contrary	position.	The	person	is
torn	by	inner	conflict	and	becomes	paralyzed.	During	progression,	the
polarities	within	the	self	balance	each	other	and	generate	energy	that	moves
forward.	One	may	be	ambivalent,	but	in	a	way	that	is	adaptive	to	reality.	In
regression,	on	the	other	hand,	the	flow	of	energy	goes	back	into	the	psychic
system	and	becomes	unavailable	for	adaptation.	When	the	polarities	come
apart,	a	severe	kind	of	ambivalence	develops	that	paralyzes	life.	A	standstill
ensues,	yes	and	no	cancel	each	other	out,	and	one	cannot	move.
Jung	noted	that	when	energy	is	not	spent	adapting	to	the	world	and	is	not
moving	in	a	progressive	way,	it	activates	the	complexes	and	increases	their
energy	potential	in	the	degree	to	which	the	ego	loses	available	energy.	This	is
the	law	of	conservation	of	energy	as	it	applies	to	the	psyche.	The	energy	does
not	disappear	from	the	system	but	rather	disappears	from	consciousness.	And

this	results	typically	in	states	of	depression,	crippling	ambivalence,	internal
conflict,	uncertainty,	doubt,	questioning,	and	loss	of	motivation.
While	progression	fosters	adaptation	to	the	world,	regression	leads
paradoxically	to	new	possibilities	for	development.	Regression	activates	the
inner	world.	When	the	inner	world	has	been	activated,	a	person	is	forced	to
deal	with	it	and	later	to	make	
a	new	adaptation	to	life	that	takes	the	results
into	account.	That	movement	toward	inner	adaptation	eventually	leads	to	a
fresh	outer	adaptation	when	the	libido	once	again	begins	moving	in	the
direction	of	progression.	But	now	the	person	is	more	mature	precisely
because	of	the	confrontation	with	the	unconscious—the	complexes,	personal
history,	foibles,	faults,	and	all	the	other	troublesome	and	painful	issues	that
surface	during	regression.	(I	will	discuss	Jung’s	concept	of	individuation	in
greater	detail	in	chapter	8.)
It	should	be	noted	that	Jung	makes	a	clear	distinction	between	the
progression	and	regression	of	libido	on	the	one	hand	and	the	attitudes	of
extroversion	and	introversion	on	the	other.	It	is	easy	for	the	beginner	to
confuse	them.	Introverts	progress	in	their	own	way,	adapting	to	the	world	in
an	introverted	fashion,	while	extroverts	progress	in	an	extroverted	way.	The
same	holds	true	for	regression.	For	example,	an	extroverted-thinking	type
person,	who	has	habitually	used	thinking	to	deal	with	the	world	and	to
manipulate	people,	comes	up	against	a	situation	in	life	where	that	function
does	not	work	very	effectively	and	experiences	defeat.	Relationship	problems
cannot	as	a	rule	be	solved	by	extroverted	thinking.	Here	a	totally	different
approach	is	needed.	When	this	person’s	superior	function	is	rendered	useless,
a	sense	of	frustration	and	defeat	takes	over,	for	now	suddenly	other	functions
are	demanded	and	these	are	not	readily	available.	So	the	libido	regresses	and
typically	activates	the	inferior	function,	in	this	case	the	introverted-feeling
function.	As	Jung	pointed	out,	the	inferior	function	is	unconscious	and	carries
the	slime	of	the	murky	depths	with	it	when	it	comes	up	into	consciousness.
An	integrated-feeling	function	is	a	tool	of	the	ego	and	is	a	refined,
discriminating	and	rational	function	that	orients	one	by	establishing	values.
An	inferior,	undifferentiated	feeling	function	surging	up	from	the
unconscious,	however,	provides	only	a	small	amount	of	guidance	about
values,	but	rather	screams	in	bright	red	letters:	“This	is	the	most	important
thing	in	my	whole	life!	I	cannot	live	without	it!”	It	is	highly	emotional.	The
inferior	function’s	lack	of	adaptive	skill	is	generally	all	too	evident,	but	the
ego	is	challenged	to	use	the	emotions	and	thoughts	that	come	into
consciousness	in	
this	fashion,	and	by	doing	so	it	begins	the	task	of	adapting	to
the	hidden	side	of	the	personality,	the	unconscious.

By	contrast,	people	who	get	a	lot	of	mileage	in	the	first	half	of	their	lives
out	of	their	ability	to	relate	well	to	other	people	reach	a	point	where	this	no
longer	satisfies	them.	The	highly	developed	extroverted-feeling	function	does
not	feed	the	soul	anymore.	Other	potentials	demand	to	be	realized.	Perhaps
introverted	intuitive-thinking	projects	(studying	philosophy	or	theology)
beckon	and	seem	more	attractive	than	another	luncheon	with	friends	or	one
more	family	gathering	over	the	holidays.	The	full	human	life	span	has	many
periods	of	significant	transformation.
Transformations	and	Symbols
How	such	transformations	occur	was	a	deep	and	abiding	concern	of	Jung’s.	In
the	essay	“On	Psychic	Energy”	he	provides	a	formal	theoretical	account	of
transformation.	In	the	section	on	
canalization	of	libido
,
21
	he	considers	some
natural	
gradients
	of	energy.	A	gradient	is	a	pathway	along	which	energy
flows.	In	the	state	of	nature—that	is,	in	the	paradisal	state	as	we	imagine	it—
no	work	as	such	is	required	or	gets	done.	Like	the	pet	dog	who	lives	in	a
comfortable	home,	sleeps	a	lot,	begs	for	table	scraps,	and	(if	not	neutered)
engages	in	seasonal	frenetic	sexual	activities,	so	a	human	being	living	purely
in	the	state	of	nature	would	live	by	physical	instinct	and	desire	alone.	But
humans	have	created	culture	and	have	specialized	in	work,	and	this
presupposes	the	ability	to	channel	energy	out	of	the	natural	gradients	into
other,	seemingly	artificial	pathways.	How	does	this	happen?
Jung	does	not	conceive	of	nature	and	culture	as	diametrically	opposed	to
one	another.	Rather,	he	regards	them	both	as	belonging	to	human	nature	in	a
fundamental	way.	The	human	inventions	of	culture	and	specialization	in	work
come	about	by	means	of	the	mind’s	creation	of	analogues	to	instinctual	goals
and	activities.	Such	analogues	function	as	symbols.
22
	Ideas	and	images—
mental	contents—channel	libido	in	new	directions	by	diverting	it	from	its
natural	gradient	and	objects.	For	example,	an	idea	arises	in	the	young	child
that	is	as	appealing	as	the	image	of	the	breast.	This	
idea,	realized	in	play,
draws	more	energy	to	itself	than	does	the	breast	and	allows	the	child	to	delay
gratifying	the	urge	to	nurse	and	eventually	to	wean	spontaneously.	In	later
life,	the	analogue	or	symbol	that	replaces	the	breast	may	be	a	gourmet	meal.
The	thought	of	enjoying	
haute	cuisine
	offers	the	same	type	of	soothing	to	the
adult	as	the	image	of	the	full	breast	offers	to	the	small	child.	An	idea	or	a
cultural	object	thus	captures	the	energy	that	would	otherwise	have	remained

fixated	on	the	breast	of	the	mother.	Both	breast	and	restaurant	are	symbols	for
something	that	at	that	moment	in	psychological	development	can	be
expressed	in	no	better	way.
A	
symbol
	attracts	a	great	deal	of	energy	to	itself	and	shapes	the	ways	in
which	psychic	energy	is	channeled	and	spent.	Religions	have	traditionally
attracted	large	amounts	of	human	energy,	and	they	rely	for	their	power	almost
exclusively	on	symbols.	Through	their	use	of	symbols	they	also	become
powerful	politically	and	economically,	but	these	powers	are	secondary	to	the
symbolic	one	which	undergirds	them.	Remove	the	symbolic	power	and	the
whole	edifice	collapses.	When	vibrant	and	alive,	religious	ideas	and	rituals
have	tremendous	attractive	power	to	pull	human	energy	into	certain	activities
and	preoccupations.	Why	does	the	symbol	have	a	steeper	gradient	than	the
natural	object?	How	can	an	idea	become	more	interesting	and	compelling	to
human	beings	than	instinctively	attractive	objects	like	breasts	or	penises?
Jung	knew	well	enough	that	this	does	not	come	about	because	of	a	decision
taken	by	the	ego.	When	“Bill	W.”	(William	G.	Wilson),	cofounder	of
Alcoholics	Anonymous,	wrote	to	Jung	in	1961	and	reported	on	Roland	H’s
fate	(a	patient	Jung	had	treated	for	alcoholism	in	the	early	1930s),	Jung
responded	by	admitting	that	the	therapist	is	essentially	helpless	in	trying	to
overcome	a	patient’s	substance	dependence.
23
	Jung’s	message	was—in	my
paraphrase	of	his	
letter—You	need	a	symbol,	an	analogue	that	will	draw	the
energy	that	has	gone	into	drinking.	You	must	find	an	equivalent	that	is	more
interesting	than	getting	drunk	every	night,	that	attracts	your	interest	more
than	that	bottle	of	vodka.
	A	powerful	symbol	is	required	to	bring	about	such	a
major	transformation	in	an	alcoholic,	and	Jung	spoke	of	the	need	for	a
conversion	experience.	Symbols	emerge	out	of	the	archetypal	base	of	the
personality,	the	collective	unconscious.	They	are	not	artificially	invented	by
the	ego	but	rather	appear	spontaneously	from	the	unconscious	especially
during	times	of	great	need.
Symbols	are	the	great	organizers	of	libido.	Jung’s	use	of	the	term	symbol	is
precise.	A	symbol	is	not	a	sign.	Signs	can	be	read	and	interpreted	with	no	loss
of	meaning.	A	stop	sign	means	“stop!”	But	a	symbol	is,	in	Jung’s
understanding,	the	best	possible	statement	or	expression	for	something	that	is
either	essentially	unknowable	or	not	yet	knowable	given	the	present	state	of
consciousness.	Interpretations	of	symbols	are	attempts	to	translate	the
symbol’s	meaning	into	a	more	understandable	vocabulary	and	set	of	terms,
but	the	symbol	remains	the	best	present	expression	of	the	meaning	it
communicates.	Symbols	open	one	up	to	mystery.	And	they	also	combine
elements	of	spirit	and	instinctuality,	of	image	and	drive.	For	that	reason,

descriptions	of	exalted	spiritual	states	and	mystical	experiences	frequently
refer	to	physical	and	instinctual	gratifications	like	nourishment	and	sexuality.
Mystics	talk	about	the	ecstasy	of	uniting	with	God	as	an	orgasmic	experience,
and	most	likely	it	is.	The	experience	of	the	symbol	unites	body	and	soul	in	a
powerful,	convincing	feeling	of	wholeness.	For	Jung	the	symbol	holds	so
much	importance	because	of	its	ability	to	transform	natural	energy	into
cultural	and	spiritual	forms.	In	this	essay	he	does	not	discuss	the	timing	of
such	symbolic	emergences	in	the	psyche.	This	is	considered	in	other	writings,
importantly	in	the	late	work	entitled	“Synchronicity:	An	Acausal	Connecting
Principle.”
24
The	difference	between	transformation	and	sublimation	spells	out	a	basic
distinction	between	the	theories	of	Jung	and	Freud.	For	Freud,	civilized
human	beings	are	able	to	sublimate	libidinal	desires,	but	sublimation	only
produces	substitutes	for	the	true	objects	of	such	desire.	Libido	will	attach	to
the	substitutes,	but	these	remain	only	second	best.	In	reality,	the	libido	wishes
to	return	to	early	childhood,	to	mother	and	father	fixations,	to	Oedipal	fantasy
fulfillment.	Freud’s	analysis,	therefore,	was	always	reductive.	Jung	agreed
that	the	libido	originally	seeks	the	mother’s	body	because	nurturance	is
essential	for	the	baby’s	
survival.	Later,	the	libido	is	drawn	into	sexual
channels	and	flows	along	those	gradients:	procreation	is	necessary	for	the
survival	of	the	species.	But	when	the	libido	finds	a	spiritual	analogue,	an	idea
or	image,	it	will	go	there	because	that	is	its	goal,	not	because	this	is	a
substitute	for	sexual	fulfillment.	For	Jung,	this	is	a	transformation	of	libido,
and	culture	arises	from	such	transformations.	Culture	is	a	fulfillment	of
desire,	not	an	obstruction	of	it.	Jung	is	convinced	that	the	nature	of	the	human
being	leads	to	culture	formation,	to	the	creation	of	symbols,	to	containment	of
energy	so	that	its	flow	can	be	directed	toward	these	spiritual	and	mental
contents.

4
The	Psyche’s	Boundaries
(Instincts,	Archetypes,	and	the	Collective	Unconscious)
B
efore	modern	times	mapmakers	put	a	distinctive	stamp	on	their	works.	You
could	identify	a	map	by	certain	unique	features	that	pointed	to	the	hand	of	its
creator.	It	was	a	work	of	art	as	well	as	a	work	of	science.	Up	to	this	point,
Jung’s	map	of	the	soul	does	not	look	so	different	from	other	depth
psychological	accounts.	With	this	chapter,	however,	we	begin	studying	its
truly	unique	features.	It	was	Jung’s	exploration	and	account	of	what	he	called
the	
collective	unconscious
	that	gave	his	work	its	most	distinctive	style.
To	pick	up	where	we	left	off	in	the	preceding	chapter	on	psychic	energy,	I
will	simply	state	that	for	Jung	the	archetype	is	a	primary	source	of	psychic
energy	and	patterning.	It	constitutes	the	ultimate	source	of	psychic	symbols,
which	attract	energy,	structure	it,	and	lead	ultimately	to	the	creation	of
civilization	and	culture.	From	hints	in	earlier	chapters,	it	should	be	somewhat
evident	that	the	theory	of	archetypes	is	critical	to	Jung’s	overall	conception	of
the	psyche.	In	fact,	it	is	the	foundation.
A	discussion	of	Jung’s	theory	of	archetypes,	however,	also	means	that	we
must	take	up	his	theory	of	instincts	as	well.	Archetype	and	instinct	are
profoundly	related,	in	Jung’s	view.	For	Jung,	mind	and	body	are	so
interrelated	that	they	are	nearly	inseparable.	If	this	is	ignored,	the	discussion
of	archetypal	images	easily	slips	into	an	overly	spiritualized	and	groundless
psychology.	To	discuss	the	archetype	from	a	psychological	standpoint	rather
than	from	a	philosophical	or	metaphysical	one,	one	must	ground	it	in	life	as
lived	in	the	human	body,	where	it	also	becomes	intertwined	with	personal
history	and	psychological	development.	The	theory	of	archetypes	is	what
makes	Jung’s	map	of	the	soul	Platonic,	but	the	difference	between	Jung	and
Plato	is	that	Jung	studied	the	Ideas	as	psychological	factors	and	not	as	eternal

forms	or	abstractions.
As	I	said	at	the	outset	of	this	book,	Jung	was	intent	on	exploring	the	psyche
to	its	furthest	boundaries.	If	he	was	not	a	systematic	thinker,	he	was	certainly
an	ambitious	one,	and	his	ambition	pushed	him	to	press	on	beyond	the	bounds
of	scientific	knowledge	in	his	time.	Science	is	still	catching	up	with	many	of
his	intuitions.	Probing	ever	further	into	the	dark	unknown	terrain	of	the	mind,
he	made	some	of	his	most	original	contributions	to	psychology	and
psychoanalysis	in	his	theory	of	a	collective	unconscious	and	its	contents.	It	is
sometimes	asked	whether	what	he	described	as	psychic	facts	are	discoveries
or	inventions.	But	this	is	the	fate	of	the	mapmaker	when	the	continents	he	is
outlining	are	brand	new	and	still	wholly	unknown	and	unexplored.	The	early
mapmaker	is	forced	to	draw	on	intuition	and	to	risk	guesswork.	He	also
consults	the	maps	of	others	and	even	studies	ancient	texts.	These	can	be
helpful,	or	they	can	be	misleading.	Jung	was	more	than	adequately	aware	of
the	pitfalls	in	this	enterprise,	and	he	was	as	cautious	in	formulating	his
speculations	as	he	was	adventurous	in	allowing	himself	to	have	them	in	the
first	place.
1
For	this	chapter,	I	will	refer	mainly	to	Jung’s	late	summation	of	theory,	the
classic	paper	“On	the	Nature	of	the	Psyche.”	This	essay	does	not	depict	the
realm	of	the	collective	unconscious	in	the	florid	manner	of	grand	images	that
Jung	was	so	fond	of	in	other	
works,	particularly	in	his	late	works	using	the
images	and	texts	of	alchemy.	This	is	a	sober	and	abstract	theoretical	account,
rather	difficult	to	read	and	dry	to	the	taste	of	those	who	look	to	Jung	for
visionary	inspiration.	But	this	work	supplies	the	theoretical	bedrock	on	which
those	other	formulations	rest,	and	without	understanding	this	basic	theory	the
rest	can	look	much	like	a	collection	of	animals	in	a	well-stocked	zoo:	a	lot	of
exotic	color	but	not	much	rationale.
2
	The	critics	who	read	Jung	in	this	way
frankly	do	not	understand	the	nature	of	his	project.	The	rationale	for	his
collections	of	abstruse	and	exotic	facts	is	given	in	many	places,	but	with
special	clarity	in	this	theoretical	paper.
This	essay	was	written	in	1945—46	and	revised	in	1954.	I	consider	it
arguably	Jung’s	most	comprehensive	and	synthetic	theoretical	work.	A	full
understanding	of	this	work	actually	requires	extensive	knowledge	of	all	of
Jung’s	previous	writings.	It	presents	little	that	is	new	in	his	thinking	but	rather
pulls	together	many	threads	that	have	been	dropped	in	numerous	essays	from
the	prior	three	decades.	A	brief	review	of	the	thinking	that	led	up	to	this
classic	paper	is	in	order	and	will	provide	the	context	for	understanding	its
importance.

Jung’s	ambition	from	very	early	on	was	to	participate	in	the	creation	of	a
general	psychology	that	would	map	the	psyche	from	its	highest	to	its	lowest
dimensions,	its	closest	to	its	farthest	reaches,	truly	a	map	of	the	soul.	This
ambition	can	be	traced	back	into	the	early	years	of	his	career.	In	a	letter
written	in	1913	to	editors	Smith	Ely	Jelliffe	and	William	Alanson	White	of
the	newly	founded	
Psychoanalytical	Review
	and	published	in	the	first	issue	of
that	journal,	Jung	offers	a	sketch	of	his	bold	vision	for	this	new	psychology.
He	applauds	the	editors	on	their	plan	to	“unite	in	their	journal	the
contributions	of	competent	specialists	in	various	fields.”
3
	The	fields	he	cites
as	being	relevant	and	useful	to	psychology	are,	amazingly,	philology,	history,
archaeology,	mythology,	folklore	studies,	ethnology,	philosophy,	theology,
pedagogy,	and	biology!	If	all	of	these	contribute	their	specialized	knowledge
to	the	study	of	the	human	psyche,	Jung	writes,	there	will	be	a	chance	of
reaching	“the	distant	goal	of	a	genetic	psychology,	which	will	clear	our	eyes
for	medical	psychology,	just	as	
comparative	anatomy	has	already	done	in
regard	to	the	structure	and	function	of	the	human	body.”
4
	Jung	speaks	in	this
letter	also	of	a	“comparative	anatomy	of	the	mind,”
5
	which	would	be
achieved	by	pooling	expertise	from	many	fields	of	research	and	study.	His
goal	was	to	achieve	a	broad	overview	of	the	psyche	and	to	grasp	it	as	a	whole,
from	which	one	could	observe	the	various	parts	in	their	dynamic	interplay.
As	Jung	penetrated	more	deeply	into	the	sources	of	the	unconscious
material—primarily	dreams	and	fantasies—presented	by	his	patients	and
discovered	in	his	own	inner	work	on	himself,	he	was	led	to	theorize	about
some	general	structures	of	the	human	mind,	structures	that	belong	to	everyone
and	not	only	to	himself	or	to	the	individual	patient	before	him.	The	deepest
layer	of	the	human	psyche	he	named	the	“collective	unconscious”	and
conceived	of	its	contents	as	a	combination	of	universally	prevalent	patterns
and	forces	called	“archetypes”	and	“instincts.”	In	his	view,	there	is	nothing
individual	or	unique	about	human	beings	at	this	level.	Everyone	has	the	same
archetypes	and	instincts.	For	uniqueness	one	must	look	elsewhere	in	the
personality.	True	individuality,	he	argued	in	
Psychological	Types
	and	
Two
Essays	in	Analytical	Psychology
,	is	the	product	of	a	personal	struggle	for
consciousness	that	he	called	the	individuation	process	(see	chapter	8).
Individuation	is	the	flower	of	a	person’s	conscious	engagement	with	the
paradox	of	the	psyche	over	an	extended	period	of	time.	Instincts	and
archetypes,	on	the	other	hand,	are	nature’s	gift	to	each	of	us.	They	are	given
equally	to	one	and	all,	and	everyone	shares	them	whether	rich	or	poor,	black
or	white,	ancient	or	modern.	This	theme	of	universality	is	a	basic	feature	of
Jung’s	understanding	of	the	human	psyche.	He	gave	it	succinct	expression

late	in	life	in	the	revision	of	a	work	entitled	“The	Father	in	the	Destiny	of	the
Individual”:
Man	“possesses”	many	things	which	he	has	never	acquired	but	has
inherited	from	his	ancestors.	He	is	not	born	as	a	
tabula	rasa,
	he	is
merely	born	unconscious.	But	he	brings	with	him	systems	that	are
organized	and	ready	to	function	in	a	specifically	human	way,	and	these
he	owes	to	millions	of	years	of	human	development.	Just	as	the
migratory	and	nest-building	instincts	of	birds	were	never	learnt	or
acquired	individually,	man	brings	with	him	at	birth	the	ground-plan	of
his	nature,	and	not	only	of	his	individual	nature	but	of	his	collective
nature.	These	inherited	systems	correspond	to	the	human	situations
that	have	existed	since	primeval	times:	youth	and	old	age,	birth	and
death,	sons	and	daughters,	father	and	mothers,	mating,	and	so	on.
Only	the	individual	consciousness	experiences	these	things	for	the
first	time,	but	not	the	bodily	system	and	the	unconscious.	For	them
they	are	only	the	habitual	functioning	of	instincts	that	were	preformed
long	ago.
6
Archetypes	(Psychic	Universals)
The	origin	of	Jung’s	notion	of	archetypes	can	be	traced	back	in	his	written
works	to	the	period	between	1909	and	1912	when,	while	still	collaborating
with	Freud,	he	was	investigating	mythology	and	writing	
Psychology	of	the
Unconscious.
	In	that	work	he	studied	the	fantasies	of	Miss	Frank	Miller,
which	had	been	made	publicly	available	in	a	book	published	by	his	friend	and
colleague	from	Geneva,	Gustav	Flournoy.	Jung	wanted	to	explore	the
significance	of	these	fantasies	from	his	newly	emerging	point	of	view,	which
had	been	incubating	since	his	early	psychiatric	study	of	his	mediumistic
cousin,	Helene	Preiswerk.	His	engagement	with	Frank	Miller’s	fantasy
materials	became	the	occasion	for	Jung	to	begin	distancing	himself	explicitly
from	Freud’s	libido	theory	and	to	start	discussing	general	patterns	in	what	he
would	later	come	to	call	the	collective	unconscious.
According	to	his	autobiography,	Jung	got	his	first	impression	of	impersonal
layers	of	the	unconscious	from	a	dream	he	had	during	the	voyage	to	America
with	Freud	in	1909.	He	dreamed	of	a	house	(called	“my	house”	in	the	context
of	the	dream)	that	had	many	levels.	In	the	dream	he	explores	the	storeys	of
the	house	from	the	main	floor	(the	present	age)	down	into	the	basement	(the

recent	historical	past)	and	beyond	that	down	through	several	sub-cellars	(the
ancient	historical	past,	like	the	Greek	and	Roman,	and	finally	the	prehistoric
and	Paleolithic	past).	This	dream	answered	a	question	he	had	been	asking
during	the	trip,	namely:	“On	what	premises	is	Freudian	psychology	founded?
To	what	category	of	
human	thought	does	it	belong?”
7
	The	dream	image,	he
writes,	“became	for	me	a	guiding	image”	for	how	to	conceive	of	psychic
structure.	“It	was	my	first	inkling	of	a	collective	a	priori	beneath	the	personal
psyche.”
8
When	he	first	examined	the	work	of	Flournoy,	Jung	knew	little	about	Miss
Miller	or	her	personal	life	history.	Perhaps	this	would	be	an	advantage	for
theory,	he	mused,	since	now	his	thought	could	not	be	contaminated	by
personal	associations	and	projections.	Undistracted	by	the	trees,	he	could	look
at	the	forest.	He	would	be	free	to	speculate	about	more	general	psychological
patterns.	And	speculate	he	did,	with	considerable	zest	and	abandon.	As	he
looked	at	Miss	Miller’s	fantasies,	he	imagined	her	reality	from	the	few	facts
that	were	included	in	the	account:	an	unmarried	young	woman	traveling	alone
in	Europe,	attracted	to	an	Italian	sailor	but	unable	to	act	upon	her	erotic
interest,	damming	up	unused	sexual	libido	and	falling	into	a	profound
regression.	Using	what	he	knew	at	the	time	about	psychological	dynamics—
learned	largely	from	Freud	and	fellow	psychoanalysts—he	also	ventured	to
extend	some	of	those	understandings	to	the	point	of	suggesting	that	libido,
sexuality	itself,	has	a	dual	nature.	On	the	one	hand,	it	seeks	fulfillment	in
sexual	involvement	and	pleasure;	on	the	other	hand,	it	inhibits	such
involvement	and	even	seeks	the	opposite,	death.	He	ventured	to	propose	a
death	wish	equal	to	the	wish	for	life,	the	second	becoming	more	prominent	in
the	second	half	of	life	as	one	prepares	to	die.	Innate	to	the	human	psyche	was
a	tendency	to	sacrifice	satisfaction,	sexual	or	otherwise,	and	to	pursue
nonsexual	tendencies	and	desires	that	could	not	be	satisfied	by	any	amount	of
sexual	activity.
This	was	a	strange	course	for	Jung’s	thinking	to	take	in	reflecting	on	the
psychological	situation	of	this	young	woman.	On	the	one	hand,	she	was
obviously	seeking	an	erotic	outlet	in	life	and	was	not	able	to	find	one.	Hence
her	regressions	and	attempts	at	sublimation:	visions,	poetry	writing,
daydreaming,	all	of	which,	Jung	felt,	showed	evidence	of	premorbidity	and
could	eventually	lead	to	mental	illness.	On	the	other	hand,	perhaps	Miss
Miller’s	sexual	inhibitions	reflected	a	deeper	conflict	within	her	psyche,	a
conflict	that	one	could	see	as	generally	
human	and	indeed	archetypal.	There
was	the	much	larger	issue	of	the	whole	course	of	human	evolution	and
development,	and	Jung	was	theorizing	that	sexual	libido	had	in	the	course	of

eons	of	human	evolution	been	channeled	into	pathways	of	culture	through
metaphors	and	likenesses	at	first	and	then	into	deeper	transformations.	These
could	no	longer	be	adequately	defined	in	the	least	as	sexual.	He	was	arriving
at	a	whole	new	theory	of	culture	while	tracing	the	libido	fluctuations	of	Miss
Miller.	It	is	no	wonder	that	many	readers	have	found	this	book	confusing.
As	Jung	explored	human	evolution,	drawing	many	parallels	between	what
was	going	on	in	a	sort	of	morbid	way	with	Miss	Miller	and	what	had
happened	hundreds	and	thousands	and	indeed	hundreds	of	thousands	of	years
in	the	past,	he	outlined	the	constellation	of	the	hero	myth	and	assigned	to	the
hero	the	role	of	creating	consciousness.	The	hero	is	a	basic	human	pattern—
characteristic	of	women	equally	as	of	men—that	demands	sacrificing	the
“mother,”	meaning	a	passive	childish	attitude,	and	assuming	the
responsibilities	of	life	and	meeting	reality	in	a	grown	up	way.	The	hero
archetype	demands	leaving	off	with	childish	fantasy	thinking	and	insists	on
engaging	reality	in	an	active	way.	If	humans	had	not	been	able	to	take	up	this
challenge,	they	would	have	been	doomed	eons	ago.	In	order	to	meet	reality
consistently,	though,	a	tremendous	sacrifice	of	desire	and	wistful	longing	for
the	comforts	of	childhood	is	demanded.	This	was	Miss	Miller’s	dilemma:	she
was	confronted	with	the	task	of	growing	up	and	meeting	her	adult	roles	in
life,	and	she	was	shrinking	from	the	challenge.	She	was	not	leaving	fantasy
thinking	behind,	and	she	was	getting	lost	in	a	morbid	unreal	world	that	was
relatively	unrelated	to	her	reality.	She	was	in	a	massive	regression	to	the
“mother,”	and	the	question	was:	Would	she	get	stuck	there,	like	Theseus	in
Hades,	and	never	return?	Jung	was	not	so	sure,	but	he	guessed	she	might	fall
into	psychosis.
As	he	worked	on	these	fantasies	of	Frank	Miller,	Jung	brought	together	a
host	of	related	myths,	fairy	tales,	and	religious	motifs	from	remote	corners	of
the	world	to	interpret	her	images.	He	was	awestruck	by	these	amazing
parallels,	and	his	mind	groped	for	an	explanation	of	why	this	woman	had
spontaneously	produced	
images	and	themes	resembling	those	of	Egyptian
mythology,	of	the	aboriginal	tribes	of	Australia,	and	of	the	native	peoples	of
America.	Why	do	such	striking	parallels	occur	to	the	human	mind	without
much	seeming	effort?	What	does	this	mean?	He	connected	these	facts	to	his
dream	of	the	descending	basements,	and	thus	he	began	to	realize	that	he	was
discovering	evidence	for	the	existence	of	a	collective	layer	of	the
unconscious.	This	would	mean	that	there	is	material	in	the	unconscious	that
has	not	been	put	there	by	repression	from	consciousness.	It	is	there	to	begin
with.
The	same	pursuit	of	psychic	universals,	it	must	be	noted,	also	intrigued

Freud,	but	in	quite	a	different	way.	Freud	was	looking	for	a	single
unconscious	wish—a	central	complex—that	would	explain	all	psychic
conflict,	and	he	thought	he	had	found	it	in	the	story	of	the	primal	horde.
While	Jung	was	writing	
Psychology	of	the	Unconscious,
	Freud	was	working
on	
Totem	and	Taboo.
	With	clinical	material	in	one	hand	and	Frazer’s	
Golden
Bough
	in	the	other,	Freud	was	pursuing	a	project	similar	to	Jung’s,	and	the
race	was	on	as	to	who	would	make	the	Great	Discovery	first.	Whether	Freud’s
or	Jung’s	version	is	preferred,	the	common	denominator	is	that	the	human
mind	has	universal	structures,	just	like	the	human	body,	and	these	can	be
discovered	through	an	interpretive	and	comparative	method.
In	one	sense,	then,	Freud,	like	Jung,	produced	a	theory	of	archetypes.	His
notion	of	archaic	residues	acknowledged	ancient	patterns.	While	Freud’s
attitude	toward	this	material	was	very	different	from	Jung’s	discussions	of
mythology	and	its	relation	to	the	psyche,	the	two	men	were	nevertheless
following	similar	lines	of	thought	and	reaching	for	a	similar	conclusion.
The	Unconscious
The	parallels	Jung	found	between	images	and	myths	of	individuals	and
groups	in	unrelated	historical	periods	and	locations	intensified	his	quest	for	an
explanation.	Is	there	a	common	point	of	origin	for	psychotic	images,	dream
images,	and	personal	fantasy	productions	on	the	one	hand,	and	collective
mythical	and	religious	images	and	
thoughts	on	the	other?	Jung	was	exploring
commonalities	in	human	thinking	and	imagining.	In	order	to	carry	this
research	further,	he	had	to	get	his	patients	to	reveal	their	unconscious
fantasies	and	thoughts.
In	his	paper	“On	the	Nature	of	the	Psyche,”	Jung	tells	how	he	activated
fantasy	activity	in	his	patients:	“I	had	often	observed	patients	whose	dreams
pointed	to	a	rich	store	of	fantasy	material.	Equally,	from	the	patients
themselves,	I	got	the	impression	that	they	were	stuffed	full	of	fantasies,
without	being	able	to	tell	me	just	where	the	inner	pressure	lay.	I	therefore	took
up	a	dream	image	or	an	association	of	the	patient’s,	and,	with	this	as	a	point
of	departure,	set	him	the	task	of	elaborating	or	developing	his	theme	by
giving	free	rein	to	his	fantasy.”
9
	Freud’s	technique	of	free	association	had
been	similar,	but	Jung	let	imagination	roam	further	and	more	freely.	He
encouraged	his	patients	to	elaborate	fantasy	material:	“This,	according	to
individual	taste	and	talent,	could	be	done	in	any	number	of	ways,	dramatic,

dialectic,	visual,	acoustic,	or	in	the	form	of	dancing,	painting,	drawing,	or
modeling.	The	result	of	this	technique	was	a	vast	number	of	complicated
designs	whose	diversity	puzzled	me	for	years,	until	I	was	able	to	recognize
that	in	the	method	I	was	witnessing	the	spontaneous	manifestation	of	an
unconscious	process	which	was	merely	assisted	by	the	technical	ability	of	the
patient,	and	to	which	I	later	gave	the	name	‘individuation	process.’”
10
	This
process	of	imaging	unconscious	contents	brings	them	into	conscious	form.
The	chaotic	assortment	of	images	that	at	first	confronted	me	reduced
itself	in	the	course	of	the	work	to	certain	well-defined	themes	and
formal	elements,	which	repeated	themselves	in	identical	or	analogous
form	with	the	most	varied	individuals.	I	mention,	as	the	most	salient
characteristics,	chaotic	multiplicity	and	order;	duality,	the	opposition
of	light	and	dark,	upper	and	lower,	right	and	left;	the	union	of
opposites	in	a	third;	the	quaternity	(square,	cross);	rotation	(circle,
sphere);	and	finally	the	centring	process	and	a	radial	arrangement	that
usually	followed	some	quaternary	system….	The	centring	process	is,
in	my	experience,	the	never-to-be-surpassed	climax	of	the	whole
development,	and	is	characterized	as	such	by	the	fact	that	it	brings
with	it	the	greatest	possible	therapeutic	effect.
11
Jung	goes	on	to	speak	about	“formative	principles	[that]	are
unconscious.”
12
	In	addition	to	his	consideration	of	the	fantasy	material
produced	by	psychotics,	Jung’s	experience	with	neurotic	patients	encouraged
him	to	think	that	major	formative	elements	exist	within	the	unconscious.
Since	ego	consciousness	does	not	determine	this	process,	the	source	of	the
forms	that	appear	must	lie	somewhere	else.	Some	forms	might	be	determined
by	complexes,	but	others	are	more	primordial	and	impersonal	and	cannot	be
accounted	for	by	individual	life	experience.
Jung	presented	this	paper	in	1946	at	the	Eranos	Conference	at	Ascona,
Switzerland,	where	many	of	his	major	essays	were	given	and	which	he
attended	from	its	inception	in	1933	until	1960,	the	year	before	his	death.	Here
people	gathered	annually	from	all	over	the	world.	Their	interests	lay
particularly	in	psychology	and	religion,	especially	Eastern	religions.	Olga
Froebe-Kapetyn,	the	founder	whose	longstanding	serious	interest	in	Eastern
thought	and	all	kinds	of	occultism	had	motivated	the	undertaking,	brought
together	renowned	experts	to	discuss	various	topics.	This	audience	seemed
truly	to	stimulate	Jung	and	to	draw	out	his	best	efforts.	These	people	were
members	of	a	world	class	community	of	scientists	and	scholars,	and	they
demanded	papers	of	extremely	high	quality.

“On	the	Nature	of	the	Psyche”	is	a	mature	summation	of	Jung’s
psychological	theory.	The	historical	sections	of	the	paper	deal	with	the
unconscious	in	philosophy	and	academic	psychology.	Here	Jung	lays	the
groundwork	for	his	own	definitions	of	the	unconscious,	for	his	understanding
of	its	relation	to	consciousness,	and	for	intrapsychic	dynamics.	The	notion	of
an	unconscious	is	fundamental	to	all	depth	psychologies.	This	separates	depth
psychologies	from	other	psychological	models.	As	evidence	for	the	existence
of	the	unconscious,	Jung	cites	the	dissociability	of	the	psyche.	In	certain
altered	states	of	consciousness,	for	example,	one	finds	a	subliminal	self	or
subject,	an	inner	figure	who	is	not	the	ego	but	shows	intentionality	and	will.
The	ego	can	enter	into	dialogue	with	this	other	subpersonality.	Such	a	“Jekyll
and	Hyde”	phenomenon	indicates	the	presence	of	two	distinct	centers	of
consciousness	within	one	personality.	This	also	exists,	Jung	
writes,	in	so-
called	normal	personalities	even	if	people	are	not	aware	of	this	fact.
But	once	one	posits	an	unconscious	psyche,	how	is	one	to	define	its	limits?
Can	they	be	defined	at	all,	or	are	they	so	indefinite	as	to	be	considered	more
or	less	limitless?	As	a	scientist	and	thinker,	Jung	wanted	some	clear
definitions	and	in	this	paper	he	proposes	several	of	them.	One	of	the	most
important	is	a	theoretical	concept	called	the	
psychoid
	aspect	of	the	psyche,
which	forms	a	threshold:
The	sound	frequencies	perceptible	to	the	human	ear	range	from	20	to
20,000	vibrations	per	second;	the	wave-lengths	of	light	visible	to	the
eye	range	from	7700	to	3900	angstrom-units.	This	analogy	makes	it
conceivable	that	there	is	a	lower	as	well	as	an	upper	threshold	for
psychic	events,	and	that	consciousness,	the	perceptual	system	par
excellence,	may	therefore	be	compared	with	the	perceptible	scale	of
sound	or	light,	having	like	them	a	lower	and	upper	limit.	Maybe	this
comparison	could	be	extended	to	the	psyche	in	general,	which	would
not	be	an	impossibility	if	there	were	‘psychoid’	processes	at	both	ends
of	the	psychic	scale.
13
Jung’s	view	of	the	psyche	posits	that	it	moves	along	a	scale	whose	outer
limits	gradually	disappear	into	a	psychoid	(that	is,	psyche-like)	area.	Jung
acknowledges	that	he	is	borrowing	the	adjective	“psychoid”	from	Bleuler,
who	defined	
das	Psychoide
	as	“the	sum	total	of	all	the	purposive,	mnemonic,
and	life-preserving	functions	of	the	body	and	central	nervous	system,	with	the
exception	of	those	cortical	functions	which	we	have	always	been	accustomed
to	regard	as	psychic.”
14
	Bleuler	thus	proposed	a	distinction	between	(a)	the
psychic	functions,	which	in	Jung’s	terms	include	ego-consciousness	and	the
unconscious	(personal	and	collective),	and	(b)	the	other	life-preserving

functions	of	the	body	and	the	central	nervous	system,	some	of	which	appear
to	be	quasi-psychic.	The	body	itself	is	able	to	remember	and	to	learn.	For
instance,	once	you	learn	to	ride	a	bicycle,	you	do	not	need	to	recall	this	skill
consciously.	The	body	retains	the	memory	of	how	to	do	it.	The	body	is	also
purposive	and	oriented	toward	the	preservation	of	life,	struggling	for	survival
in	its	own	way,	outside	the	range	of	the	psyche.	Jung	works	basically	within
this	set	of	
definitions	regarding	the	psychic,	the	quasi-psychic,	and	the
nonpsychic.
Jung	uses	Bleuler’s	term	psychoid	in	a	number	of	his	writings,	but	with
some	reservations.	He	criticizes	Bleuler	for	unduly	linking	psychoid	to
specific	bodily	organs	and	for	encouraging	a	kind	of	pan-psychism	that	would
find	psyche	in	everything	living.	Psychoid	for	Jung	is	a	term	that	describes
processes	that	are	psyche-like	or	quasi-psychic	but	not	properly	so.	The	term
is	used	to	distinguish	psychic	functions	from	vitalistic	ones.	Psychoid
processes	lie	between	somatic	life-energy	and	sheer	bodily	processes	on	the
one	hand	and	true	psychic	processes	on	the	other.
Instincts
At	this	point	in	his	argument,	Jung	takes	up	the	subject	of	human	instinct.
Instinct	is	rooted	in	the	physical	and	enters	the	psyche	as	impulse,	thought,
memory,	fantasy,	and	emotion.	To	be	sure,	the	whole	subject	of	instinct	is	a
problem	with	regard	to	humans.	Because	humans	have	the	ability	to	choose,
to	reflect,	and	to	act	or	not	to	act	on	so-called	instinctual	impulses,	as	other
animals	do	not,	it	is	questionable	how	large	a	role	instincts	play	in	human
behavior.	Jung	recognized	that	for	humans	the	instinctual	side	of	behavior	is
far	less	determinative	than	it	is	for	animals.	Nevertheless,	people	are	to	some
degree	influenced	by	physiological,	as	distinct	from	psychic,	needs	and
processes.	Using	Janet’s	term,	Jung	calls	this	the	
partie	inferieur
	of	human
existence.	This	part	is	controlled	by	hormones	and	shows	a	compulsive
character	that	has	led	some	to	speak	of	“drives.”
15
	Insofar	as	hormones	dictate
what	we	do	or	feel,	we	are	subject	to	drives	and	instinct.	The	
partie	inferieur,
that	is,	the	somatic	level	of	the	psyche,	is	strongly	influenced	by	bodily
processes.
Having	recognized	this	somatic	substrate,	Jung	then	states:
From	these	reflections	it	appears	that	the	psyche	is	an	emancipation	of

function	from	its	instinctual	form	and	so	from	the	compulsiveness
which,	as	sole	determinant	of	the	function,	causes	it	to	harden	into	a
mechanism.	The	psychic	condition	or	quality	begins	where	the
function	loses	its	outer	and	inner	determinism	and	becomes	capable	of
more	extensive	and	freer	application	…
16
As	information	moves	from	soma	to	psyche,	it	passes	through	the	psychoid
region,	and	as	a	result	there	is	a	considerable	softening	of	biological
determinism,	which	then	gives	way	to	a	more	“extensive	and	freer	application
…	where	it	begins	to	show	itself	accessible	to	a	will	motivated	from	other
sources.”
17
	The	appearance	of	will	is	decisive	for	establishing	a	function	as
psychic.	Hunger	and	sexuality,	for	instance,	are	somatically-based	drives	that
involve	the	release	of	hormones.	Both	are	instincts.	One	must	eat,	and	the
body	craves	sexual	release.	But	will	enters	the	picture,	since	choices	can	be
made	about	what	is	eaten	or	how	to	satisfy	one’s	sexual	urges.	Will	can
intervene	to	an	extent,	even	if	it	cannot	absolutely	control	a	person’s	ultimate
behavior	in	all	respects.
If	there	is	a	limit	on	the	psyche	at	the	somatic	end	of	the	spectrum	(the
partie	inferieur),
	there	is	also	a	limit	at	the	
partie	superieur
	of	consciousness:
“with	increasing	freedom	from	sheer	instinct	the	
partie	superieur
[consciousness]	will	ultimately	reach	a	point	at	which	the	intrinsic	energy	of
the	function	ceases	altogether	to	be	oriented	by	instinct	in	the	original	sense,
and	attains	a	so-called	‘spiritual’	form.”
18
	Instinct	loses	control	over	the
psyche	at	a	certain	point,	but	other	factors	enter	to	control	and	orient	it.	These
factors	Jung	calls	“spiritual,”	but	the	translation	of	the	German	
“geistlich”
presents	a	problem	here.	Another	English	adjective	that	could	be	used	just	as
well	is	“mental.”	These	controlling	factors	are	mental—they	are	of	the	mind,
in	the	sense	of	the	Greek	
nous
—and	they	are	no	longer	organically	based.
They	may	operate	like	instincts,	in	the	sense	of	calling	the	will	into	action,
and	they	may	even	cause	the	body	to	secrete	hormones.	Jung	wants	to	tie	the
whole	system	of	soma,	psyche,	and	spirit	together	while	preserving	analytic
distinctions	among	the	various	aspects.
The	ego	is	motivated	in	part	by	instincts,	in	part	by	mental	forms	and
images.	And	the	ego	has	some	freedom	of	choice	among	its	various	options.	It
enjoys	an	amount	of	“disposable	libido”
19
	even	if	its	motivations	are
grounded	in	instinct	or	governed	by	spirit.	Jung,	ever	the	biologist	and
medical	psychologist,	
refused	to	distance	himself	very	far	from	drives	and
instincts.	Even	the	will,	the	very	essence	of	what	defines	psyche,	is	motivated
by	biological	drives:	“the	motivation	of	the	will	must	in	the	first	place	be

regarded	as	essentially	biological.”
20
	The	instincts	lose	their	potency,
however,	at	the	mental	end	of	the	psychic	spectrum:	“at	the	…	upper	limit	of
the	psyche,	where	the	function	breaks	free	from	its	original	goal,	the	instincts
lose	their	influence	as	movers	of	the	will.	Through	having	its	form	altered,	the
function	is	pressed	into	the	service	of	other	determinants	or	motivations
which	apparently	have	nothing	further	to	do	with	the	instincts.”
21
What	I	am	trying	to	make	clear	is	the	remarkable	fact	that	the	will
cannot	transgress	the	bounds	of	the	psychic	sphere:	it	cannot	coerce
the	instinct,	nor	has	it	power	over	the	spirit,	in	so	far	as	we	understand
by	this	something	more	than	the	intellect.	Spirit	and	instinct	are	by
nature	autonomous	and	both	limit	in	equal	measure	the	applied	field	of
the	will.
22
The	psychoid	boundary	defines	the	gray	area	between	the	potentially
knowable	and	the	totally	unknowable—the	potentially	controllable	and	the
wholly	uncontrollable—aspects	of	human	functioning.	This	is	not	a	sharp
boundary	but	rather	an	area	of	transformation.	The	psychoid	thresholds	show
an	effect	that	Jung	calls	“psychization”:	nonpsychic	information	becomes
psychized,
	
passing	from	the	unknowable	into	the	unknown	(the	unconscious
psyche)	and	then	moving	toward	the	known	(ego-consciousness).	The	human
psychic	apparatus,	in	short,	shows	a	capacity	to	psychize	material	from	the
somatic	and	spiritual	poles	of	nonpsychic	reality.
If	one	observes	psychic	life	concretely	and	clinically,	it	is	never	the	case
that	instinctually-based	drive	data	is	totally	free	of	mentally-based	forms	and
images.	The	actual	presentation	is	always	a	mixture.	This	is	because	instinct
“bears	in	itself	a	pattern	of	its	situation.	Always	it	fulfills	an	image,	and	the
image	has	fixed	qualities.”	
23
	Instincts	function	very	precisely	because	they
are	guided	by	images	and	shaped	by	patterns,	which	also	constitute	the
meaning	of	the	instinct.	At	this	point	in	his	essay,	Jung	links	
archetypes,	the
basic	mental	patterns,	with	instincts.	Instincts	are	guided	and	oriented	by
archetypal	images.	On	the	other	hand,	however,	archetypes	can	behave	like
instincts:
To	the	extent	that	the	archetypes	intervene	in	the	shaping	of	conscious
contents	by	regulating,	modifying,	and	motivating	them,	they	act	like
the	instincts.	It	is	therefore	very	natural	to	suppose	that	these	factors
[the	archetypes]	are	connected	with	the	instincts,	and	to	inquire
whether	the	typical	situational	patterns	which	these	collective	form-
principles	apparently	represent	are	not	in	the	end	identical	with	the
instinctual	patterns,	namely,	with	the	patterns	of	behavior.
24

So	closely	connected	are	archetypal	patterns	and	instinctual	drives	that	one
might	be	tempted	to	reduce	one	to	the	other,	claiming	one	or	the	other	holds
priority.	There	was	the	Freudian	option,	but	Jung	rejected	it	as	biological
reductionism.	Freud	would	hold	that	archetypes	(though	he	did	not	use	this
term)	are	nothing	but	imaginal	representations	of	the	two	basic	instincts,	Eros
and	Thanatos.	This	option	would	posit	archetypes	as	images	of	instinct	and	as
derivative	from	them.	Jung	concedes	that	this	argument	is	formidable:	“I	must
admit	that	up	to	the	present	I	have	not	laid	hold	of	any	argument	that	would
finally	refute	this	possibility.”
25
	Since	Jung	could	not	prove	unequivocally
that	archetypes	and	instincts	are	not	identical,	biological	reductionism
remained	a	possibility.	However,	he	also	knew	that
archetypes	have,	when	they	appear,	a	distinctly	numinous	character
which	can	only	be	described	as	‘spiritual’,	if	‘magical’	is	too	strong	a
word.	Consequently	this	phenomenon	is	of	the	utmost	significance	for
the	psychology	of	religion.	In	its	effects	it	is	anything	but
unambiguous.	It	can	be	healing	or	destructive,	but	never	indifferent,
provided	of	course	that	it	has	attained	a	certain	degree	of	clarity.	This
aspect	deserves	the	epithet	‘spiritual’	above	all	else.	It	not	infrequently
happens	that	the	archetype	appears	in	the	form	of	a	spirit	in	dreams	or
fantasy	products,	or	even	comports	itself	like	a	ghost.	There	is	a
mystical	aura	about	its	numinosity,	and	it	has	a	corresponding	effect
upon	the	emotions.	It	mobilizes	philosophical	and	religious
convictions	in	the	very	people	who	deemed	themselves	miles	above
any	such	fit	of	weakness.	Often	it	drives	with	unexampled	passion	and
remorseless	logic	towards	its	goal	and	draws	the	subject	under	its
spell,	from	which	despite	the	most	desperate	resistance	he	is	unable,
and	finally	no	longer	even	willing,	to	break	free,	because	the
experience	brings	with	it	a	depth	and	fullness	of	meaning	that	was
unthinkable	before.
26
Archetypal	images	and	the	ideas	derived	from	them	have	an	extraordinary
power	to	sway	consciousness,	every	bit	as	forcefully	as	the	identifiable
instincts.	This	tended	to	persuade	Jung	that	archetypes	are	not	limited	to
instincts,	that	spirit	is	not	reducible	to	body,	nor	mind	to	brain.
When	the	ego	comes	upon	an	archetypal	image,	it	may	become	possessed
by	it,	overwhelmed,	and	give	up	even	wanting	to	resist,	for	the	experience
feels	so	rich	and	meaningful.	Identification	with	archetypal	images	and
energies	constitutes	Jung’s	definition	of	inflation	and	even,	eventually,
psychosis.	A	charismatic	leader,	for	example,	convinces	people	with	powerful
words	and	stimulates	ideas	for	action,	and	suddenly	those	ideas	become	the

most	important	thing	in	life	for	the	mesmerized	followers	and	true	believers.
Life	itself	may	be	sacrificed	for	images	such	as	the	flag	or	the	cross	and	for
ideas	like	nationalism,	patriotism,	and	loyalty	to	one’s	religion	or	country.
Crusades	and	countless	other	irrational	or	impractical	endeavors	have	been
engaged	in	because	the	participants	felt,	“This	makes	my	life	meaningful!
This	is	the	most	important	thing	I’ve	ever	done.”	Images	and	ideas	powerfully
motivate	the	ego	and	generate	values	and	meanings.	Cognitions	frequently
override	and	dominate	instincts.
In	contrast	to	the	impact	of	the	instincts	on	the	psyche—when	one	feels
driven	by	a	physical	need	or	necessity—the	influence	of	archetypes	leads	to
being	caught	up	in	big	ideas	and	visions.	Both	affect	the	ego	in	a	similar	way
dynamically,	in	that	the	ego	is	taken	over,	possessed,	and	driven.
“In	spite	or	perhaps	because	of	its	affinity	with	instinct,	the	archetype
represents	the	authentic	element	of	spirit,	but	a	spirit	which	is	not	to	be
identified	with	the	human	intellect,	since	it	is	the	latter’s	
spiritus	rector.”
27
The	distinction	between	spirit	and	intellect	is	easily	confused,	so	Jung	made
an	effort	to	state	clearly	that	he	is	not	speaking	of	the	thinking	function,	but
rather	of	the	
spiritus	rector
	(guiding	spirit),	which	guides	the	ego	and	its
various	functions.	Gripped	by	an	archetype,	one’s	thinking	function	
may	be
used	to	rationalize	the	archetypal	idea	and	to	bring	it	toward	realization.	One
might	even	become	a	theologian!	When	they	are	gripped	by	archetypal	ideas,
theologians	will	produce	elaborate	rationales	to	help	integrate	their
archetypally	based	visions	and	ideas	into	a	cultural	context.	But	it	is	not	the
thinking	function	that	grips	them	and	motivates	their	efforts;	rather	it	is	the
element	of	vision,	archetypally	rooted	in	nous,	that	directs	the	thinking
function.	Jung	says	baldly	that	the	“essential	content	of	all	mythologies	and
all	religions	and	all	isms	is	archetypal.”
28
The	Relationship	between	Archetypes	and	Instincts
While	it	is	true	that	instincts	and	archetypes	belong	together	“as
correspondences,”
29
	Jung	clearly	does	not	want	to	say	that	archetypes	can	be
reduced	to	instincts	or	instincts	to	archetypes.	They	are	intimately	related	as
correspondences	and	they	“	subsist	side	by	side	as	reflections	in	our	own
minds	of	the	opposition	that	underlies	all	psychic	energy.”
30
	The	psyche
exists	in	the	space	between	pure	body	and	transcendent	mind,	between	matter

and	spirit,	and	“psychic	processes	seem	to	be	balances	of	energy	flowing
between	spirit	and	instinct.”
31
	The	psyche	is	an	inbetween	phenomenon,	and
its	processes	“behave	like	a	scale	along	which	consciousness	‘slides’.	At	one
moment	it	finds	itself	in	the	vicinity	of	instinct,	and	falls	under	its	influence;
at	another,	it	slides	along	to	the	other	end	where	spirit	predominates	and	even
assimilates	the	instinctual	processes	most	opposed	to	it.”
32
	There	is	a	kind	of
eternal	shuttle	between	
partie	inferieur
	and	
partie	superieur,
	
between	the
instinctual	pole	and	the	spiritual,	archetypal	pole	of	the	psyche.
Consciousness	struggles	“in	a	regular	panic	against	being	swallowed	up	in	the
primitivity	and	unconsciousness	of	sheer	instinctuality”
33
	on	the	one	hand,
but	it	also	resists	complete	possession	by	spiritual	forces	(i.e.,	psychosis)	on
the	other.	When	coordinated,	however,	the	archetype	provides	form	and
meaning	to	the	instinct,	and	instinct	provides	raw	physical	energy	to
archetypal	images	to	assist	them	in	realizing	the	“spiritual	goal	toward	which
the	whole	nature	of	man	strives;	it	is	the	sea	to	which	all	
rivers	wend	their
way,	the	prize	which	the	hero	wrests	from	the	fight	with	the	dragon.”
34
Jung	maps	the	psyche	as	a	spectrum,	with	the	archetype	at	the	ultraviolet
end	and	the	instinct	at	the	infrared	end.	“Because	the	archetype	is	a	formative
principle	of	instinctual	power,	its	blue	is	contaminated	with	red;	it	appears	to
be	violet,	or	again,	we	could	interpret	the	simile	as	an	apocatastasis	of	instinct
raised	to	a	higher	frequency,	just	as	we	could	easily	derive	instinct	from	a
latent	(i.e.,	transcendent)	archetype	that	manifests	itself	on	a	longer
wavelength.”
35
	In	practice	and	actual	experience,	instincts	and	archetypes	are
always	found	in	mixed	and	never	in	pure	form.	The	archetypal	and	the
instinctual	ends	of	the	psychic	spectrum	come	together	in	the
unconsciousness,	where	they	struggle	with	one	another,	intermingle,	and	unite
to	form	units	of	energy	and	motivation	which	then	appear	in	consciousness	as
urges,	strivings,	ideas,	and	images.	What	we	experience	in	the	psyche	has
been	first	psychized	and	then	packaged	in	the	unconscious.
Imagine	a	line	running	through	the	psyche	and	connecting	instinct	and
spirit	at	either	end	of	it.	This	line	is	attached	to	archetype	on	one	end	and	to
instinct	at	the	other.	It	passes	information	and	data	through	the	psychoid	realm
into	the	collective	and	then	into	the	personal	unconscious.	From	there	these
contents	make	their	way	into	consciousness.	Instinctual	perceptions	and
archetypal	representations	are	the	data	of	actual	psychic	experience,	not	the
instincts	and	archetypes	in	themselves.	Neither	of	the	ends	of	the	spectrum
can	be	experienced	directly,	for	neither	is	psychic.	At	the	ends,	the	psyche
fades	into	matter	and	spirit.	And	what	are	experienced	as	archetypal	images
“are	very	varied	structures	which	all	point	back	to	one	essentially

‘irrepresentable’	basic	form.”
36
	All	the	archetypal	information	patterns	come
from	a	single	source,	an	entity	beyond	human	grasp	for	which	Jung	reserves
the	term	
self
	This	basic	form	“is	characterized	by	certain	formal	elements	and
by	certain	fundamental	meanings,	although	these	can	be	grasped	only
approximately.”
37
	It	is	Jung’s	God	term.	(The	self	will	be	discussed	in	detail
in	chapter	7.)	The	archetypal	images	that	link	the	self	and	ego-consciousness
form	a	middle	realm,	which	Jung	calls	
anima
	and	
animus,
	the	realm	of	soul
(treated	in	chapter	6).	In	Jung’s	view,	polytheistic	religions	stem	from	and
represent	the	realm	of	the	anima	and	animus,	while	monotheistic	religions
base	themselves	on	and	point	to	the	self	archetype.
On	Jung’s	map,	the	psyche	is	a	region	that	is	located	in	the	space	between
pure	matter	and	pure	spirit,	between	the	human	body	and	the	transcendent
mind,	between	instinct	and	archetype.	He	shows	it	as	stretched	between	two
ends	of	a	spectrum	that	has	openings	at	either	end	permitting	an	entrance	of
information	into	the	psyche.	At	the	ends	of	the	psyche	are	the	psychoid	areas
that	produce	quasi-psychic	effects	like	psychosomatic	symptoms	and
parapsychological	happenings.	As	information	passes	through	the	psychoid
area,	it	becomes	psychized	and	transformed	into	psyche.	In	the	psyche,	matter
and	spirit	meet.	First	these	packages	of	information	pass	into	the	collective
unconscious	where	they	become	somewhat	contaminated	by	other	contents
already	in	the	unconscious,	and	eventually	they	may	enter	consciousness	in
the	form	of	intuitions,	visions,	dreams,	perceptions	of	instinctual	drives,
images,	emotions,	and	ideas.	The	ego	must	deal	with	emerging	unconscious
contents	by	making	judgments	about	their	value	and	sometimes	decisions
about	whether	or	not	to	act	on	them.	The	burden	of	choice	is	placed	on	ego-
consciousness	to	deal	ethically	with	these	invasions	from	inner	space.

5
The	Revealed	and	the	Concealed	in	Relations	with
Others
(Persona	and	Shadow)
I
t	was	an	early	observation	of	Jung’s—later	developed	into	theoretical
propositions—that	the	psyche	consists	of	many	parts	and	centers	of
consciousness.	In	this	inner	universe,	there	is	not	simply	one	planet,	but	an
entire	solar	system	and	more.	One	can	speak	of	people	as	having	
a
personality,	but	in	fact	this	is	made	up	of	a	cluster	of	subpersonalities.
Jung	elaborated	these.	There	is	the	ego	complex;	then	there	are	the
multitude	of	lesser	personal	complexes,	of	which	the	mother	complex	and	the
father	complex	are	the	most	important	and	most	powerful;	and	finally	one
finds	the	many	archetypal	images	and	constellations.	In	a	sense,	we	are	made
of	many	potentially	divergent	attitudes	and	orientations,	and	these	can	easily
fall	into	opposition	with	one	another	and	create	conflicts	that	lead	to	neurotic
personality	styles.	In	this	chapter,	I	will	describe	a	pair	of	these	divergent
subpersonalities,	the	
shadow
	and	the	
persona
.	They	are	complementary
structures	and	exist	in	every	developed	human	
psyche.	Both	of	these	are
named	after	concrete	objects	in	sensate	experience.	The	shadow	is	the	image
of	ourselves	that	slides	along	behind	us	as	we	walk	toward	the	light.	The
persona,	its	opposite,	is	named	after	the	Roman	term	for	an	actor’s	mask.	It	is
the	face	we	wear	to	meet	the	social	world	around	us.
At	the	beginning	of	life,	the	personality	is	a	simple	undifferentiated	unity.	It
is	unformed	and	more	potential	than	real,	and	it	is	whole.	As	development
takes	place,	this	wholeness	becomes	differentiated,	and	it	separates	into	parts.
Ego-consciousness	comes	into	being,	and	as	it	grows	it	leaves	behind	much	of
the	whole	self	in	what	is	now	the	“unconscious.”	The	unconscious,	in	turn,
becomes	structured	as	material	clusters	around	imagoes,	internalizations,	and

traumatic	experiences	to	form	the	subpersonalities,	the	complexes.	The
complexes	(as	I	discussed	in	chapter	2)	are	autonomous,	and	exhibit
consciousness	of	their	own.	They	also	bind	a	certain	amount	of	psychic
energy	and	have	a	will	of	their	own.
The	Ego’s	Shadow
One	of	the	unconscious	psychic	factors	that	the	ego	cannot	control	is	the
shadow.	In	fact,	the	ego	is	usually	quite	unaware	that	it	even	casts	a	shadow.
Jung	used	the	term	shadow	to	denote	a	psychological	reality	that	is	relatively
easy	to	grasp	on	an	imagistic	level	but	more	difficult	to	grapple	with	on	the
practical	and	theoretical	levels.	He	wants	to	highlight	the	flagrant
unconsciousness	that	most	people	exhibit.	Rather	than	referring	to	the	shadow
as	a	thing,	however,	it	is	better	to	think	of	psychological	traits	or	qualities	that
are	“in	the	shadow”	(i.e.,	hidden,	behind	one’s	back,	in	the	dark)	or
“shadowy.”	Whatever	parts	of	the	personality	that	would	ordinarily	belong	to
the	ego	if	they	were	integrated,	but	have	been	suppressed	because	of	cognitive
or	emotional	dissonance,	fall	into	the	shadow.	The	specific	contents	of	the
shadow	may	change,	depending	upon	the	ego’s	attitudes	and	its	degree	of
defensiveness.	Generally,	the	shadow	has	an	immoral	or	at	least	a	disreputable
quality,	containing	features	of	a	person’s	nature	that	are	contrary	to	the
customs	and	moral	conventions	of	society.	The	
shadow	is	the	unconscious
side	of	the	ego’s	operations	of	intending,	willing,	and	defending.	It	is	the
backside	of	the	ego,	so	to	speak.
Every	ego	has	a	shadow.	This	is	unavoidable.	In	adapting	to	and	coping
with	the	world,	the	ego,	quite	unwittingly,	employs	the	shadow	to	carry	out
unsavory	operations	that	it	could	not	perform	without	falling	into	a	moral
conflict.	Without	the	ego’s	knowledge,	these	protective	and	self-serving
activities	are	carried	out	in	the	dark.	The	shadow	operates	much	like	a
nation’s	secret	espionage	system—without	the	explicit	knowledge	of	the	head
of	state,	who	is	therefore	allowed	to	deny	culpability.	Although	introspection
can	to	some	extent	bring	these	shadowy	ego	operations	to	consciousness,	the
ego’s	own	defenses	against	shadow	awareness	are	usually	so	effective	that
little	can	penetrate	them.	Asking	close	friends	or	a	longterm	spouse	to	reveal
their	honest	perceptions	is	usually	more	useful	as	a	method	of	gathering
information	about	the	ego’s	shadow	operations	than	introspection.
If	the	ego’s	willing,	choosing,	and	intending	are	tracked	deeply	enough,

one	comes	to	realms	of	darkness	and	coldness	where	it	becomes	apparent	that
the	ego	has	the	capacity,	in	its	shadow,	to	be	extremely	selfish,	willful,
unfeeling,	and	controlling.	Here	a	person	is	purely	egoistic	and	intent	on
fulfilling	personal	desires	for	power	and	pleasure	at	any	cost.	This	heart	of
darkness	within	the	ego	is	the	very	definition	of	human	evil
1
	as	it	is	played
out	in	myth	and	story.	The	figure	Iago	in	Shakespeare’s	
Othello
	is	a	classic
example.	In	the	shadow	reside	all	the	familiar	cardinal	sins.	Jung	identified
Freud’s	notion	of	the	
id
	with	the	shadow.
If	shadow	traits	to	some	extent	become	conscious	and	integrated,	a	person
is	very	different	from	the	average	individual.	Most	people	do	not	know	that
they	are	quite	as	self-centered	and	egotistical	as	they	are,	and	they	want	to
appear	unselfish	and	in	control	of	their	appetites	and	pleasures.	People	tend
rather	to	hide	such	traits	from	others	and	themselves	behind	a	facade	that
shows	them	to	be	considerate,	thoughtful,	empathic,	reflective,	and	genial.
The	exceptions	to	this	social	norm	are	those	who	have	formed	a	“negative
identity”—the	black	sheep	who	are	proud	of	their	greed	and	aggressiveness
and	flaunt	such	traits	in	public,	
while	in	their	hidden	shadow	side	they	are
sensitive	and	sentimental.	Other	exceptions	are	those	who	have	nothing	to
lose,	the	out-and-out	criminals	and	sociopaths.	Some	notorious	individuals,
like	Hitler	or	Stalin	for	instance,	gain	so	much	power	that	they	can	afford	to
indulge	their	evil	passions	to	the	fullest	degree	imaginable.	Most	people,
however,	think	of	themselves	as	decent	and	conduct	themselves	according	to
the	rules	of	propriety	in	their	social	circles	and	only	reveal	shadowy	elements
by	accident,	in	dreams,	or	when	pushed	to	extremes.	For	them	the	shadow
side	of	the	ego	still	operates,	but	through	the	unconscious,	manipulating	the
environment	and	the	psyche	so	that	certain	intentions	and	needs	get	satisfied
in	a	socially	acceptable	manner.	What	the	ego	wants	in	the	shadow	is	not
necessarily	bad	in	and	of	itself,	however,	and	often	the	shadow,	once	faced,	is
not	as	evil	as	imagined.
The	shadow	is	not	experienced	directly	by	the	ego.	Being	unconscious,	it	is
projected	onto	others.	When	one	is	tremendously	irritated	by	a	really
egotistical	person,	for	instance,	that	reaction	is	usually	a	signal	that	an
unconscious	shadow	element	is	being	projected.	Naturally	the	other	person
has	to	present	a	“hook”	for	the	shadow	projection,	and	so	there	is	always	a
mixture	between	perception	and	projection	in	such	strong	emotional
reactions.	The	psychologically	naive	or	the	defensively	resistant	person	will
focus	on	and	argue	for	the	perception	and	will	ignore	the	projective	part.	This
defensive	strategy,	of	course,	forecloses	the	possibility	of	using	the
experience	to	gain	awareness	of	shadow	features	and	for	possible	integration

of	them.	Instead,	the	defensive	ego	insists	on	feeling	self-righteous	and	casts
itself	in	the	role	of	innocent	victim	or	simple	observer.	The	other	person	is	the
evil	monster,	while	the	ego	feels	like	an	innocent	lamb.	Of	such	dynamics	are
scapegoats	made.
The	Making	of	the	Shadow
The	specific	contents	and	qualities	that	go	into	making	up	this	internal
structure,	the	shadow,	are	selected	by	the	process	of	ego	development.	What
ego-consciousness	rejects	becomes	shadow;	what	it	positively	accepts	and
identifies	with	and	absorbs	into	
itself	becomes	a	part	of	itself	and	of	the
persona.	The	shadow	is	characterized	by	the	traits	and	qualities	that	are
incompatible	with	the	conscious	ego	and	the	persona.	The	shadow	and	the
persona	are	both	ego-alien	“persons”	that	inhabit	the	psyche	along	with	the
conscious	personality	that	we	know	ourselves	to	be.	There	is	the	official	and
“public	person”	that	Jung	called	the	
persona,
	
and	this	is	more	or	less
identified	with	ego-consciousness	and	forms	the	psycho-social	identity	of	the
individual.	And	yet	it	is	also,	like	the	shadow,	ego-alien,	although	the	ego	is
more	at	ease	with	it	because	it	is	compatible	with	social	norms	and	mores.
The	shadow	personality	is	hidden	away	from	sight	and	comes	out	only	on
special	occasions.	The	world	is	more	or	less	unaware	of	this	person.	The
persona	is	much	more	evident.	It	plays	an	official	role,	daily,	of	adaptation	to
the	social	world.	Shadow	and	persona	are	like	two	brothers	(for	a	man)	or
sisters	(for	a	woman);	one	is	out	in	public,	and	the	other	is	hidden	away	and
reclusive.	They	are	a	study	in	contrasts.	If	one	is	blond,	the	other	is	dark;	if
one	is	rational,	the	other	is	emotional.	Narcissus	and	Goldmund,	Dr.	Jekyll
and	Mr.	Hyde,	Cain	and	Abel,	Eve	and	Lilith,	Aphrodite	and	Hera—these
figures	are	such	pairs.	The	one	complements—or	more	often	opposes—the
other.	Persona	and	shadow	are	usually	more	or	less	exact	opposites	of	one
another,	and	yet	they	are	as	close	as	twins.
The	persona	is	the	person	that	we	become	as	a	result	of	acculturation,
education,	and	adaptation	to	our	physical	and	social	environments.	As	I
mentioned,	Jung	borrowed	this	term	from	the	Roman	stage	where	
persona
referred	to	the	actor’s	mask.	By	putting	on	a	mask,	the	actor	assumed	a
specific	role	and	an	identity	within	the	drama,	and	his	voice	was	projected	out
through	the	mouthpiece	cut	into	the	mask’s	face.	Taken	psychologically,	the
persona	is	a	functional	complex	whose	job	is	both	to	conceal	and	to	reveal	an

individual’s	conscious	thoughts	and	feelings	to	others.	As	a	complex,	the
persona	possesses	considerable	autonomy	and	is	not	under	the	full	control	of
the	ego.	Once	in	role,	the	actor	rattles	off	his	or	her	lines	willy-nilly	and	often
without	much	consciousness.	“How	are	you?”	someone	asks	on	a	rainy
morning,	and	quick	as	a	wink,	without	a	moment’s	hesitation,	you	say,	“Just
fine,	how	about	you?”	The	persona	makes	casual	social	interaction	go	more
easily,	and	it	smoothes	the	rough	spots	that	might	otherwise	cause
awkwardness	or	social	distress.
The	shadow,	a	complementary	functional	complex,	is	a	sort	of	counter-
persona.	The	shadow	can	be	thought	of	as	a	subpersonality	who	wants	what
the	persona	will	not	allow.	Mephistopheles	in	Goethe’s	
Faust
	is	a	classic
example	of	a	shadow	figure.	Faust	is	a	bored	intellectual	who	has	seen	it	all,
has	read	all	the	important	books	and	has	learned	everything	he	wants	to	know,
and	now	he	has	run	out	of	gas	and	the	will	to	live.	He	is	depressed	and
contemplating	suicide	when	a	little	poodle	suddenly	runs	across	his	path	and
then	changes	into	Mephistopheles.	Mephistopheles	entices	Faust	to	leave	his
study	and	to	go	out	into	the	world	with	him,	to	experience	his	other	side,	his
sensuality.	He	introduces	Faust	to	his	inferior	functions,	sensation	and	feeling,
and	to	the	thrills	and	excitement	of	his	hitherto	unlived	sexual	life.	This	is	a
side	of	life	that	his	persona	as	professor	and	intellectual	had	not	permitted.
Under	the	guidance	of	Mephistopheles,	Faust	goes	through	what	Jung	called
enantiodromia,	a	reverse	of	the	personality	into	its	opposite	character	type.	He
embraces	the	shadow	and	indeed	for	a	time	becomes	identified	with	its
energies	and	qualities.
To	an	ego	that	has	been	identified	with	the	persona	and	its	assumed	values
and	qualities,	the	shadow	stinks	of	rottenness	and	evil.	Mephistopheles	does
embody	evil—pure,	intentional,	willful	destructiveness.	But	the	encounter
with	the	shadow	also	has	a	transformative	effect	on	Faust.	He	finds	new
energy,	his	boredom	vanishes,	and	he	sets	out	on	adventures	that	will	in	the
end	give	him	a	more	complete	experience	of	life.	The	problem	of	integrating
the	shadow	is	a	moral	and	psychological	problem	of	the	most	thorny	sort.	If	a
person	completely	shuns	the	shadow,	life	is	proper	but	it	is	terribly
incomplete.	By	opening	up	to	shadow	experience,	however,	a	person	becomes
tainted	with	immorality	but	attains	a	greater	degree	of	wholeness.	This	is	truly
a	devil’s	bargain.	It	is	Faust’s	dilemma,	and	it	is	a	core	problem	of	human
existence.	In	Faust’s	case,	his	soul	is	saved	in	the	end,	but	only	by	the	grace	of
God.

The	Persona
In	his	official	writings	Jung	does	not	go	into	much	detail	about	the	shadow,
but	he	does	give	an	interesting	and	detailed	account	of	the	persona.	From	this
we	can	draw	as	well	some	information	about	the	shadow	and	its	constellation
within	a	personality.	I	will	look	now	somewhat	more	closely	at	what	Jung
writes	about	the	persona,	its	position	in	the	psyche	and	its	formation.
He	defines	this	term	in	the	major	work	
Psychological	Types
,	published	in
1921.	This	volume	concludes	with	a	long	chapter	titled	“Definitions,”	in
which	Jung	tries	to	be	as	clear	as	possible	about	the	terminology	he	has
adapted	from	psychoanalysis	and	taken	from	psychology	in	general	as	well	as
about	the	terms	he	has	created	for	his	own	analytical	psychology.	As	far	as
psychology	and	psychoanalysis	are	concerned,	the	term	
persona
	is	Jung’s
own	special	intellectual	property.	Section	48,	one	of	the	longest	in	this
chapter,	is	devoted	to	the	term	
soul
,	and	this	is	where	the	persona	is	discussed.
Here	Jung	reflects	on	two	complementary	structures,	the	persona	and	the
anima.	I	will	discuss	the	latter	in	the	next	chapter.
Today	the	term	persona	has	been	somewhat	accepted	into	the	vocabulary	of
psychology	and	contemporary	culture.	It	is	used	frequently	in	popular
parlance,	in	newspapers,	and	in	literary	theory.	It	means	the	person-as-
presented,	not	the	person-as-real.	The	persona	is	a	psychological	and	social
construct	adopted	for	a	specific	purpose.	Jung	chose	it	for	his	psychological
theory	because	it	has	to	do	with	playing	roles	in	society.	He	was	interested	in
how	people	come	to	play	particular	roles,	adopt	a	conventional	collective
attitude,	and	represent	social	and	cultural	stereotypes	rather	than	assuming
and	living	their	own	uniqueness.	Certainly	this	is	a	well-known	human	trait.	It
is	a	kind	of	mimicry.	Jung	gave	it	a	name	and	worked	it	into	his	theory	of	the
psyche.
Jung	begins	his	definition	of	the	persona	by	making	the	point	that	many
psychiatric	and	psychological	studies	have	shown	that	the	human	personality
is	not	simple	but	complex,	that	it	can	be	shown	to	split	and	to	fragment	under
certain	conditions,	and	that	
there	are	many	subpersonalities	within	the	normal
human	psyche.	However,	“it	is	at	once	evident	that	such	a	plurality	of
personalities	can	never	appear	in	a	normal	individual.”
2
	In	other	words,	while
we	are	not	all	“multiple	personalities”	in	a	clinical	sense,	everyone	does
manifest	“traces	of	character	splitting.”
3
	The	normal	individual	is	simply	a
less	exaggerated	version	of	what	is	found	in	pathology.	“One	has	only	to

observe	a	man	rather	closely,	under	varying	conditions,	to	see	that	a	change
from	one	milieu	to	another	brings	about	a	striking	alteration	of	personality	…
‘angel	abroad,	devil	at	home’.”
4
	In	public	such	an	individual	is	all	smiles,
backslapping,	gladhanding,	extroverted,	easygoing,	happy-go-lucky,	joking;
at	home,	on	the	other	hand,	he	is	sour	and	grumpy,	doesn’t	talk	to	his	kids,
sulks	and	hides	behind	the	newspaper,	and	can	be	verbally	or	otherwise
abusive.	Character	is	situational.	The	story	of	Jekyll	and	Hyde	represents	an
extreme	form	of	this.	Another	novel	with	the	same	theme	is	
The	Picture	of
Dorian	Gray,
	
where	the	main	character	keeps	a	picture	of	himself	in	the	attic.
As	he	grows	older,	the	portrait	ages,	revealing	his	true	nature	and	character;
yet	he	continues	to	go	out	in	public	without	wrinkles—youthful,
sophisticated,	and	cheerful.
Jung	goes	on	to	discuss	the	fascinating	subject	of	human	sensitivity	to
milieus,	to	social	environments.	People	are	usually	sensitive	to	other	people’s
expectations.	Jung	points	out	that	particular	milieus	such	as	families,	schools,
and	workplaces	require	one	to	assume	specific	attitudes.	By	“attitude”	Jung
means	“an	a	priori	orientation	to	a	definite	thing,	no	matter	whether	this	be
represented	in	consciousness	or	not.”
5
	An	attitude	can	be	latent	and
unconscious,	but	it	is	constantly	operating	to	orient	a	person	to	a	situation	or	a
milieu.	Further,	an	attitude	is	“a	combination	of	psychic	factors	or	contents
which	will	…	determine	action	in	this	or	that	definite	direction.”
6
	An	attitude
is	a	feature	of	character,	therefore.	The	longer	an	attitude	persists	and	the
more	frequently	it	is	called	upon	to	meet	the	demands	of	a	milieu,	the	more
habitual	it	becomes.	As	behaviorism	would	express	it,	the	more	frequently	a
behavior	or	attitude	is	reinforced	by	the	environment,	the	stronger	and	the
more	entrenched	it	becomes.	People	can	be	trained	to	develop	specific
attitudes	to	certain	
milieus	and	thus	to	respond	in	particular	ways,	reacting	to
signals	or	cues	as	they	have	been	trained	to	do.	Once	an	attitude	has	been
fully	developed,	all	that	is	required	to	activate	behavior	is	the	appropriate	cue
or	trigger.	Jung	observed	this	in	1920,	about	the	time	that	behaviorism	was
gaining	ground	in	North	America,	led	by	John	Broadus	Watson,	whose	first
major	publication	appeared	in	1913.
In	contrast	to	people	living	and	working	in	rural	or	natural	areas,	which	are
relatively	unified	environments,	many	educated	urban	dwellers	move	in	two
totally	different	milieus:	the	domestic	circle	and	the	public	world.	This	was
more	true	of	men	than	of	women	in	the	Europe	of	Jung’s	day.	Men	of	Jung’s
time	and	culture	worked	in	one	environment	and	lived	domestically	in
another,	and	they	had	to	respond	to	two	distinctly	different	milieus,	each	of
which	provided	a	different	set	of	cues.	“These	two	totally	different

environments	demand	two	totally	different	attitudes,	which,	depending	on	the
degree	of	the	ego’s	identification	with	the	attitude	of	the	moment,	produce	a
duplication	of	character.”
7
A	friend	of	mine	has	a	midlevel	managerial	job	in	a	government	agency,
and	so	he	must	set	the	tone	for	employees	in	his	group	regarding	values	and
behavioral	patterns	in	the	public	sector.	The	agency	is	a	milieu,	and	he	finds
out	from	other	sources	what	the	correct	values	are	and	then	informs	the
workers	under	him	that,	for	example,	they	must	be	sensitive	to	such	issues	as
nondiscrimination,	sexism,	and	affirmative	action.	My	friend	told	me	that	he
plays	that	role	easily	and	well	in	the	workplace,	but	when	he	watches	TV	in
the	privacy	of	his	own	home	he	has	very	different	reactions.	There	he	is
ultraconservative.	In	the	workplace	he	is	a	liberal	and	enlightened	modern
man.	His	ego	is	not,	however,	strongly	identified	with	the	attitude	of	that
milieu.	He	has	a	functional	persona:	one	that	he	puts	on	and	takes	off	easily
without	identifying	with	it.	My	friend	is	very	clear	in	his	own	mind	that	he
does	not	identify	with	that	workplace	persona.
Frequently,	however,	the	ego	does	identify	with	the	persona.	The
psychological	term	
identification
	points	to	the	ego’s	ability	to	absorb	and
unite	with	external	objects,	attitudes,	and	persons.
This	is	a	more	or	less	unconscious	process.	One	simply	finds	oneself
unintentionally	imitating	another	person.	Perhaps	one	does	not	even	notice	it
oneself,	but	other	people	see	the	mimicry.	In	principle,	one	can	say	that	the
ego	is	quite	separate	from	the	persona,	but	in	actual	life	this	is	often	not	the
case,	because	the	ego	tends	to	identify	with	the	roles	it	plays	in	life.	“The
domestic	character	is,	as	a	rule,	molded	by	emotional	demands	and	an
easygoing	acquiescence	for	the	sake	of	comfort	and	convenience;	whence	it
frequently	happens	that	men	who	in	public	life	are	extremely	energetic,
spirited,	obstinate,	willful	and	ruthless	appear	good-natured,	mild,	compliant,
even	weak,	when	at	home	and	in	the	bosom	of	the	family.	Which	is	the	true
character,	the	real	personality?	This	question	is	often	impossible	to	answer.”
8
Even	so,	there	is	always	more	to	the	ego	than	persona	identification.	The
persona	will	at	most	form	a	close	wrapping	around	the	side	of	the	ego	that
faces	out	into	the	social	world.	But	people	will	usually	still	recognize	a
difference	between	role	and	true	inner	identity.	The	ego’s	core	is	archetypal	as
well	as	individual	and	personal.	This	is	the	still,	small	point	of	reflection,	the
center	of	the	“I.”	The	archetypal	side	of	the	ego’s	core	is	pure	“I	am,”	a
manifestation	of	the	self.	It	is	simply	“I-am-ness”	(see	chapter	1).
On	the	personal	side,	however,	the	ego	is	permeable	to	influence	from

external	forces.	Such	influence	makes	its	way	into	the	ego	and	pushes	aside
this	pure	“I-ness”	as	the	ego	identifies	with	the	new	content.	This	is	the	ego
“learning.”	We	learn	our	names.	After	that	we	become	our	names,	we	identify
with	the	sounds	of	them.	When	the	ego	is	identified	with	the	persona,	it	feels
identical	to	it.	Then	I	
am
	my	name;	I	
am
	the	son	of	my	father	and	mother,	the
brother	of	my	sister.	Once	this	identification	is	made,	I	am	no	longer	simply
“I	am	that	I	am,”	but	instead,	I	am	Murray	Stein,	born	on	such-and-such	a
date,	with	this	particular	personal	history.	This	is	who	I	am	now.	I	identify
with	memories,	with	a	construction	of	my	history,	with	some	of	my	qualities.
In	this	way	the	pure	“I-ness”—the	archetypal	piece—can	get	obscured	and	go
into	hiding	or	disappear	from	the	conscious	altogether.	Then	one	is	truly
dependent	upon	the	persona	for	one’s	entire	identity	and	sense	of	reality,	not
to	mention	one’s	sense	of	self-worth	and	belonging.
Of	course	this	can	also	fluctuate.	At	times	one	can	be	in	the	pure	“I-am”
state,	not	identifying	with	anything	in	particular;	at	other	times	one	is	firmly
identified	with	some	content	or	quality	and	heavily	invested	in	a	persona
image.	T.S.	Eliot	said	of	cats	that	they	have	three	names:	one	that	everybody
knows,	one	that	only	a	few	know,	and	one	that	only	the	cat	knows!	The	first
and	second	refer	to	the	persona,	the	third	refers	to	the	archetypal	core	of	the
ego.
The	Two	Sources	of	the	Persona
Jung	found	two	sources	of	the	persona:	“In	accordance	with	social	conditions
and	requirements,	the	social	character	is	oriented	on	the	one	hand	by	the
expectations	and	demands	of	society,	and	on	the	other	by	the	social	aims	and
aspirations	of	the	individual.”
9
	
The	first,	the	expectations	and	demands	of	the
milieu,	includes	such	requirements	as	being	a	certain	kind	of	person,	behaving
appropriately	according	to	the	social	mores	of	the	group,	and	often	believing
in	certain	propositions	about	the	nature	of	reality	(such	as	consenting	to
religious	teachings).	The	second	source	includes	the	individual’s	social
ambitions.
In	order	for	society	to	be	able	to	influence	one’s	attitudes	and	behavior,	one
must	want	to	belong	to	society.	The	ego	must	be	motivated	to	accept	the
persona	features	and	the	roles	that	society	requires	and	offers,	or	else	they	will
simply	be	avoided.	There	will	be	no	identification	at	all.	An	agreement	must
be	struck	between	the	individual	and	society	in	order	for	persona	formation	to

take	hold.	Otherwise	the	individual	lives	an	isolated	life	on	the	margins	of
culture,	forever	a	sort	of	uneasy	adolescent	in	an	adult	world.	This	is	different
from	the	heroic	rebel	who	goes	his	own	way	and	ignores	social	norms.	That	is
another	kind	of	persona,	and	one	that	is	offered	by	all	societies	and	groups.
There	are	many	roles	to	play.
Generally	speaking,	the	more	prestigious	the	role,	the	stronger	is	the
tendency	to	identify	with	it.	People	do	not	usually	identify	with	lower-class
persona	roles	like	garbage	collector	or	janitor,	or	even	middleclass	roles	like
manager	or	superintendent.	If	they	do,	
they	often	do	so	humorously.	These
jobs	have	their	own	value	and	dignity	but	they	do	not	imply	roles	to	wear
proudly	in	society,	and	the	temptation	to	identify	strongly	with	them	is
minimal.	Role	identification	is	generally	motivated	by	ambition	and	social
aspiration.	For	example,	a	person	who	is	elected	to	the	United	States	Senate
acquires	a	role	with	high	collective	value	and	enormous	prestige.	With	it
come	fame,	honor,	and	high	social	visibility,	and	the	person	who	is	a	senator
tends	to	fuse	with	this	role,	even	to	the	extent	of	wishing	to	be	treated	by
close	friends	with	conspicuous	respect.	It	has	been	reported	that	after	John	F.
Kennedy’s	election	as	president	of	the	United	States	even	his	close	family
members	called	him	Mr.	President.
In	Ingmar	Bergman’s	autobiographical	film	
Fanny	and	Alexander
,	a	little
boy	is	sent	to	live	with	a	horrible,	abusive	bishop	who	is	emotionally	remote
and	cold	and	deeply	identified	with	a	religious	persona.	In	one	scene	of	the
film,	the	bishop	is	shown	dreaming.	In	the	dream,	he	is	struggling	to	tear	off	a
mask,	which	he	cannot	detach,	and	he	ends	up	pulling	his	face	off	along	with
the	mask.	The	bishop’s	ego	is	utterly	fused	with	the	bishop	persona	because
that	role	has	guaranteed	his	personal	aspirations	in	life.	A	bishop	is	without
doubt	a	highranking	person	in	society.	Similarly	physicians,	military	men,	and
royalty	are	granted	personas	that	attract	strong	identification.	And	yet	the
bishop,	in	his	nightmare,	tries	to	remove	the	mask	from	his	face.	Why?
The	relation	between	ego	and	persona	is	not	simple	because	of	the
contradictory	aims	of	these	two	functional	complexes.	The	ego	moves	in	a
fundamental	way	toward	separation	and	individuation,	toward	consolidating	a
position	first	of	all	outside	of	the	unconscious,	and	then	also	somewhat
outside	of	the	family	milieu.	There	is	in	the	ego	a	strong	movement	toward
autonomy,	toward	an	“I-ness”	that	can	function	independently.	At	the	same
time,	another	part	of	the	ego,	which	is	where	the	persona	takes	root,	is	moving
in	the	opposite	direction,	toward	relating	and	adapting	to	the	object	world.
These	are	two	contrary	tendencies	within	the	ego—a	need	for	separation	and
independence	on	the	one	hand,	and	a	need	for	relationship	and	belonging	on

the	other.	The	ego’s	radical	desire	for	separation/individuation	is	often	
rooted
in	the	shadow	because	it	is	so	threatening	both	to	group	life	and	to	the
individual’s	well-being.	Objectively,	we	all	need	other	people	in	order	to
survive	physically	and	psychologically.	The	ego’s	movement	toward
relationship	and	adaptation	to	the	present	milieu,	which	seeks	to	insure
survival,	provides	the	opportunity	for	the	persona	to	take	hold.	And	this	then
becomes	a	person’s	self-presentation	to	the	world.
Persona	Development
This	conflict	in	the	ego	between	individuation/separation	and	social
conformity	generates	a	good	deal	of	the	ego’s	basic	anxiety.	How	can	one	be
free,	unique,	and	individual	while	also	being	accepted	and	liked	by	others	and
accommodating	to	their	needs	and	wishes.	Clearly	a	source	of	fundamental
conflict	exists	between	ego	and	persona	development.	By	early	adulthood,
one	hopes	that	sufficient	development	has	taken	place	in	both	ego	and
persona	so	that	the	ego’s	dual	needs	for	independence	and	relationship	are
satisfied,	while	at	the	same	time	the	persona	has	made	a	suitable	enough
adaptation	so	that	the	ego	can	live	in	the	real	world.	Famous	geniuses	like
Wagner,	Beethoven,	and	Picasso	seem	to	be	exceptions	to	this	rule	in	that
their	gifts	grant	them	license	to	be	themselves	as	individuals	to	an
extraordinary	degree.	They	are	forgiven	their	excesses	because	of	what	they
offer	the	world	in	compensation.
The	ego	does	not	deliberately	choose	to	identify	with	a	particular	persona.
People	find	themselves	in	milieus	in	which	they	have	to	survive,	and	most	do
their	best	to	make	their	way	ahead.	Birth	order	is	an	important	factor,	also
gender.	A	little	girl	or	boy	observes	what	other	kids	are	doing	and	imitates
them.	Little	girls	try	out	their	mothers’	attitudes	while	trying	on	their	mothers’
clothes.	Little	boys	also	try	on	their	mothers’	clothes	sometimes,	and	their
parents	worry	about	it.	Clothes	represent	the	persona.	Little	boys	more
frequently	imitate	their	fathers	or	brothers,	wearing	caps	when	they	do,	and
swagger	and	spit	if	that’s	what	the	others	are	doing.	Gender	is	certainly	one
way	in	which	we	sort	ourselves	out	early	on,	and	these	features	are	taken	up
in	the	
persona.	A	youngster	realizes	that	he	or	she	is	treated	in	a	certain	way	if
the	behavior	is	right,	and	responds	in	a	gender-appropriate	manner.	This	may
come	quite	naturally	to	the	individual	child	or	not.	Sometimes	the	persona
fits,	sometimes	it	does	not.	Eventually	an	attitude	is	formed	that	is	at	least

adequate,	if	not	enhancing,	in	terms	of	gender-related	attractiveness.	(The
deeper	issues	related	to	gender	and	gender	identification	will	be	discussed	in
the	following	chapter.)
Persona	development	has	two	potential	pitfalls.	One	is	over-identification
with	the	persona.	The	individual	becomes	unduly	concerned	with	pleasing
and	adapting	to	the	social	world	and	comes	to	believe	that	this	constructed
image	is	all	there	is	to	the	personality.	The	other	problem	lies	in	not	paying
enough	attention	to	the	external	object	world	and	being	too	exclusively
involved	with	the	inner	world	(a	condition	that	Jung	will	describe	as	anima	or
animus	possession).	Such	a	person	attends	to	impulses,	wishes,	desires,	and
fantasies,	and	is	so	taken	up	with	that	world	and	identified	with	it	that	not
enough	attention	is	paid	to	other	people.	Consequently,	such	a	person	tends	to
be	inconsiderate,	blind,	and	unrelated	to	others,	and	gives	up	these
characteristics	only	when	forced	to	do	so	by	the	harshest	blows	of	fate.
Persona	development	is	typically	a	major	problem	in	adolescence	and	early
adulthood,	when	there	is	so	much	activity	in	the	inner	world,	so	many
impulses,	fantasies,	dreams,	desires,	ideologies	and	idealisms	on	the	one	side
and	so	much	peer	pressure	toward	conformity	on	the	other.	Relatedness	to	the
larger	social	world	may	look	very	primitive	and	collective,	unbalanced	by	a
kind	of	horde	mentality,	an	identification	with	the	peer	group	and	its
collective	values.	Such	identification	with	the	peer	group	assists	the
adolescent	in	breaking	free	from	parents,	a	necessary	step	toward	maturity.	At
the	same	time,	the	teenager	is	blindly	inconsiderate,	indeed,	almost	unaware,
of	the	object	world	and	lives	in	a	fantasy	of	invincibility.	Adults	tend	to	apply
terms	like	inflation	and	grandiosity	to	describe	this	combination	of
hypertrophy	of	the	inner	world	and	maladaptation	to	outer	reality.	On	the
other	hand,	some	adolescents	pay	too	much	attention	to	adult	values	and
expectations.	Dressed	in	their	button-down	shirts,	
carrying	briefcases,	and,	at
fifteen,	talking	about	becoming	corporate	attorneys,	they	are	so	adapted	to
expectations	of	family	and	culture	that	not	much	personal	identity	is
developing.	They	are	on	the	way	to	becoming	mere	stereotypes	of	cultural
forms,	victims	of	premature	persona	adaptation.
Both	introverts	and	extroverts	develop	a	persona,	for	both	attitude	types
must	relate	to	the	world	of	objects.	For	extroverts,	however,	the	development
of	the	persona	is	a	simpler	process	than	it	is	for	introverts.	Extroverted	libido
goes	to	the	object	and	stays	there,	and	extroverts	record	and	relate	to	objects
without	much	fuss	or	complication.	For	introverts,	attention	and	psychic
energy	go	out	to	objects	but	then	return	to	the	subject,	and	this	creates	a	more
complicated	relation	to	objects.	An	object	is	not	only	something	outside	the

psyche	but	is	also,	for	the	introvert,	profoundly	inside	the	psyche.	Attachment
is	more	difficult.	Extroverts,	therefore,	have	an	easier	time	finding	a	suitable
persona.	They	are	more	at	ease	with	the	object	world	because	it	doesn’t
threaten	them	so	intimately.	The	introvert’s	persona	is	more	ambiguous,
diffident	or	uncertain,	and	varies	from	one	context	to	another.
For	everyone,	though,	the	persona	must	relate	to	objects	and	protect	the
subject.	This	is	its	dual	function.	While	introverts	can	be	very	outgoing	with	a
few	people,	in	a	large	group	they	shrink	and	disappear	and	the	persona	often
feels	inadequate,	particularly	with	strangers	and	in	situations	in	which	the
introvert	does	not	occupy	a	defined	role.	Cocktail	parties	are	a	torture,	but
acting	a	role	on	stage	may	be	a	pure	joy	and	pleasure.	Many	famous	actors
and	actresses	are	quite	deeply	introverted.	In	private	they	may	be	shy,	but
given	a	public	role	they	feel	protected	and	secure	and	can	easily	pass	as	the
most	extroverted	types	imaginable.
The	persona,	when	used	creatively	within	the	context	of	a	strong
psychological	development,	functions	to	express	as	well	as	to	hide	aspects	of
the	personality.	An	adequate	persona	is	broad	enough	not	only	to	express	the
socially	appropriate	aspects	of	the	personality	but	also	to	be	genuine	and
plausible.	The	individual	can,	without	much	damage,	identify	with	a	persona
to	the	extent	that	it	is	an	true	expression	of	personality.	Of	course	this	may
change	with	age,	and	new	personas	appear	as	individuals	enter	new	stages	of
life.	Social	extroverts	may	become	more	introverted,	for	example,	as	they
pass	into	their	50’s	and	60’s.	Later	in	life	one	also	realizes	there	is	a	difference
between	feeling	that	the	persona	is	true,	honest,	and	genuine	on	the	one	hand
and	fully	and	unconsciously	identifying	with	it	on	the	other.
Essentially,	the	persona,	which	is	the	psychic	skin	between	ego	and	world,
is	not	only	a	product	of	interaction	with	objects,	but	includes	as	well	the
individual’s	projections	onto	those	objects.	We	adapt	to	what	we	perceive
other	people	are	and	what	they	want.	This	may	be	considerably	different	from
how	others	see	them	or	how	they	see	themselves.	Wrapped	into	the	fabric	of
the	persona	are	projections	that	originate	in	the	complexes,	for	instance	in	the
parental	complexes,	and	return	to	the	subject	via	the	introjective	process	and
enter	into	the	persona.	This	is	why	early	childhood	has	such	a	profound	effect
upon	adult	personas.	Even	after	parents	are	long	since	outgrown	and	left
behind,	they	continue	to	affect	the	persona	because	they	are	projected	into	the
world	from	the	parental	complexes	and	are	continually	adapted	to	by	the
individual’s	persona.	We	are	good	little	boys	and	girls	long	after	we	need	to
be.	Carrying	the	persona	over	from	one	context	to	another	presents	problems
because,	in	a	continuing	effort	to	adapt,	the	original	context	is	projected	onto

new,	quite	different	situations.	This	was	Freud’s	observation	concerning
“transference.”	The	old	context	of	childhood	is	transferred	into	the	new
context	of	the	doctor-patient	relationship.	Until	one	realizes	how	milieus	are
different,	one	perseveres	in	old	habitual	behaviors,	responding	to	the	new
milieu	as	though	it	were	the	old	familiar	one.
The	Persona’s	Transformations
The	archetypal	core	of	the	ego	does	not	change	over	time,	but	the	persona	can
be	and	is	modified	many	times	in	the	course	of	a	lifetime,	depending	on	the
ego’s	perception	of	the	changed	environment	and	its	ability	to	interact	with	it.
A	major	change	occurs	in	the	passage	from	childhood	into	adolescence;
another	in	the	passage	from	adolescence	into	adulthood;	another	in	the	course
of	
the	mid-life	transition	from	early	adulthood	into	middle	age;	yet	another	in
the	transition	into	old	age.	The	competent	ego	meets	each	of	these
adaptational	challenges	with	appropriate	alterations	in	self-concept	and
persona	self-presentation.	People	think	differently	of	themselves,	dress
differently,	cut	their	hair	differently,	buy	different	kinds	of	cars	and	houses
depending	on	their	age,	marital	status,	economic	and	social	class,	and	peer-
group	preferences.	All	of	this	is	reflected	in	persona	changes.
The	various	roles	one	assumes	in	the	course	of	a	lifetime	have,	of	course,	a
collective	and	to	some	extent	archetypal	basis.	The	persona	has,	like	every
functional	complex,	an	archetypal	core.	There	are	predictable,	typical	roles	to
be	filled	in	all	human	groups.	For	example,	there	is	the	oldest	child	who	is	the
Little	Adult,	and	the	mischievous	Trickster	Kid	who	is	still	playing	practical
jokes	in	middle	and	old	age,	and	the	alluring	Femme	Fatale	who	flirts	and
seduces	her	way	through	life	beginning	in	earliest	childhood.	Families	assign
roles	in	typical	ways	to	their	children	and	their	adult	members.	Birth	order	of
children	often	plays	a	large	role	in	the	personas	they	will	adopt.	The	first	child
is	a	responsible	little	grownup,	the	middle	child	is	a	mediator,	and	the
youngest	child	is	the	creative	baby.	The	black	sheep	role	is	found	everywhere
and	in	all	times,	as	is	the	scapegoat.	People	are	assigned	such	roles	by
unconscious	dynamics	within	families	and	groups,	and	when	they	accept	them
in	childhood	they	often	carry	some	version	of	the	role	with	them	throughout
life.
What	is	it	that	causes	personas	to	stick	to	people	with	tenacity?	In	part	it	is
identification	and	sheer	familiarity.	A	persona	becomes	identified	with	one’s

personality.	It	offers	a	psychosocial	identity.	But	shame	is	also	a	fundamental
motivator.	The	persona	protects	one	from	shame,	and	the	avoidance	of	shame
is	probably	the	strongest	motive	for	developing	and	holding	on	to	a	persona.
Ruth	Benedict’s	writings	on	shame	and	guilt	cultures	showed	that	western
nations	are	characteristically	guilt	cultures	and	eastern	countries	are	by
contrast	shame	cultures.	Shame	cultures	emphasize	persona	more	than	do
guilt	cultures,	in	the	sense	that	if	one	loses	face	one	might	as	well	die.	Loss	of
face	is	the	ultimate	crisis.	The	situation	is	quite	different	in	guilt	cultures
where	guilt	can	be	
assuaged	or	redressed:	the	guilty	person	can	pay	the	price
and	be	restored	to	community.
Guilt	involves	a	discrete	action,	whereas	shame	wipes	out	one’s	whole
sense	of	self-worth.	Shame	is	a	more	primitive,	and	potentially	a	more
destructive	kind	of	emotion.	We	tend	to	feel	either	guilty	about	or	profoundly
ashamed	of	the	things	we	do	that	are	at	odds	with	the	adopted	persona.	This	is
the	realization	of	shadow	in	the	personality.	Shadow	induces	shame,	a	sense
of	unworthiness,	a	feeling	of	uncleanness,	of	being	soiled	and	unwanted.	To
be	well-trained	is	to	be	proud;	to	soil	oneself	is	shameful.	Nature	has	been
conquered	by	the	toilet-trained	ego.	Such	experiences	of	shame	include
anything	that	does	not	fit	into	the	way	we	were	trained:	to	be	a	good	person,
the	right	kind	of	person;	to	fit	in,	to	be	accepted.	In	a	puritanical	culture	like
ours,	particular	kinds	of	sexual	fantasies	and	behaviors	that	are	not
appropriate	to	a	“good	person’s”	persona	easily	lead	to	feelings	of	shame.
Another	shadow	feature	is	aggression.	Feeling	aggressive,	hateful,	or	envious
are	shaming	emotions.
These	normal	human	reactions	tend	to	be	hidden	away;	we	are	embarrassed
by	them,	in	the	same	way	that	we	are	ashamed	of	certain	physical	or	character
flaws	that	we	see	in	ourselves.	The	persona	is	the	face	we	put	on	to	meet	the
other	faces,	to	be	like	them	and	to	be	liked	by	them.	We	do	not	want	to	be	too
different,	for	our	points	of	difference,	where	the	persona	ends	and	the	shadow
begins,	make	us	ashamed.
Integrating	Persona	and	Shadow
The	shadow	and	persona	are	a	classic	pair	of	opposites,	standing	in	the	psyche
as	polarities	of	the	ego.	Since	the	overall	task	of	psychological	development
(“individuation,”	discussed	in	chapter	8)	is	integration,	and	wholeness	is	the
over-arching	and	supreme	value,	we	need	to	ask	here	in	a	preliminary	way	at

least:	What	does	it	mean	to	integrate	persona	and	shadow?	In	the	context	of
this	chapter’s	topic,	integration	hinges	on	self-acceptance,	on	fully	accepting
those	parts	of	oneself	that	do	not	belong	in	the	persona	image,	which	is	itself
usually	an	image	of	an	ideal	or	at	least	of	a	
cultural	norm.	The	personal
aspects	of	which	one	is	ashamed	are	often	felt	to	be	radically	evil.	While
some	things	truly	are	evil	and	destructive,	frequently	shadow	material	is	not
evil.	It	is	only	felt	to	be	so	because	of	the	shame	attached	to	it	due	to	its
nonconformity	with	the	persona.
What	is	it	like	when	somebody	has	achieved	a	measure	of	integration
between	persona	and	shadow?	Jung	quotes	a	letter	from	a	former	patient,
written	some	time	after	he	saw	her	for	analysis:
Out	of	evil,	much	good	has	come	to	me.	By	keeping	quiet,	repressing
nothing,	remaining	attentive,	and	by	accepting	reality—taking	things
as	they	are,	and	not	as	I	wanted	them	to	be—by	doing	all	this,	unusual
knowledge	has	come	to	me,	and	unusual	powers	as	well,	such	as	I
could	never	have	imagined	before.	I	always	thought	that	when	we
accepted	things	they	overpowered	us	in	some	way	or	other.	This	turns
out	not	to	be	true	at	all,	and	it	is	only	by	accepting	them	that	one	can
assume	an	attitude	towards	them.	So	now	I	intend	to	play	the	game	of
life,	being	receptive	to	whatever	comes	to	me,	good	and	bad,	sun	and
shadow	forever	alternating,	and	in	this	way	also	accepting	my	own
nature	with	its	positive	and	negative	sides.	Thus	everything	becomes
more	alive	to	me.	What	a	fool	I	was!	How	I	tried	to	force	everything
to	go	according	to	the	way	I	felt	it	ought	to!
10
This	woman	has	stepped	back	both	from	the	persona	and	from	splitting
persona	and	shadow	into	opposites,	and	she	is	now	simply	observing,
reflecting	on	and	accepting	her	psyche	as	it	comes	to	her,	then	sorting,	seeing
what	it	was	about,	and	making	some	choices.	She	has	created	a	psychological
distance	between	the	ego	complex	and	the	persona,	as	well	as	between	the
ego	and	the	shadow.	She	is	no	longer	possessed	on	either	end	of	the	spectrum.
Jung	holds	that	opposites	are	united	in	the	psyche	through	the	intervention
of	a	“third	thing.”	A	conflict	between	opposites—persona	and	shadow,	for
example—can	be	regarded	as	an	individuation	crisis,	an	opportunity	to	grow
through	integration.	Coming	into	conflict	are	collective	values	on	the	persona
side,	and	shadow	aspects	of	the	ego	that	belong	to	the	individual’s	native
instinctual	makeup	(Freud’s	
id
)	and	also	some	that	are	derivative	from	the
archetypes	and	the	unconscious	complexes.	Since	shadow	content	is	not
acceptable	to	the	persona,	the	conflict	may	be	fierce.	Jung	held	that	if	the	two

poles	are	held	in	tension,	a	solution	will	
appear	if	the	ego	can	let	go	of	both
and	create	an	inner	vacuum	in	which	the	unconscious	can	offer	a	creative
solution	in	the	form	of	a	new	symbol.	This	symbol	will	present	an	option	for
movement	ahead	that	will	include	something	of	both—not	simply	a
compromise,	but	an	amalgamation	that	calls	forth	a	new	attitude	on	the	part	of
the	ego	and	a	new	kind	of	relation	to	the	world.	This	process	can	be	observed
as	people	develop	both	in	therapy	and	through	life	experience—as	they
outgrow	their	former	conflicts,	assume	new	personas,	and	integrate	formerly
unacceptable	parts	of	the	self.
People	do	change	through	therapy	and	in	the	course	of	life	development.
The	persona,	as	a	tool	of	adaptation,	has	a	great	potential	for	change.	It	can
become	increasingly	flexible,	given	that	the	ego	is	willing	to	modify	old
patterns.	Stories	such	as	
Dr.	Jekyll	and	Mr.	Hyde
	describe	a	complete	split
between	persona	and	shadow.	In	these	stories	there	is	no	integration,	only
fluctuation	back	and	forth	between	the	opposites.	Shadow	roles	and	impulses
are	acted	out,	without	the	appearance	of	a	transcendent	function	to	bring
about	an	integration	of	those	opposites.	One	wonders	about	people	in	real	life
who	cannot	integrate	such	opposites.	In	some	cases,	the	dark	side	may	be	so
extreme	and	so	highly	charged	with	energy	that	its	integration	with	a	socially
acceptable	persona	of	any	kind	is	impossible.	Today	the	only	solution	to	this
problem	is	psychotropic	medicine,	which	can	put	a	severe	damper	on	the
unconscious	and	inhibit	the	shadow’s	power	sources.	In	other	cases,	the	ego	is
too	unstable	and	weak	to	moderate	impulsivity	enough	to	allow	for	the
constellation	of	the	transcendent	function.

6
The	Way	to	the	Deep	Interior
(Anima	and	Animus)
In	his	autobiography	Jung	tells	a	story	about	the	discovery	of	the	anima.
1
	He
writes	that	during	his	years	of	intense	inner	work	after	breaking	with	Freud	in
1913	there	was	a	period	when	he	questioned	himself	about	the	nature	and
value	of	what	he	was	doing.	Is	this	science?	he	asked	himself.	Or	is	it	art?	He
was	recording	his	dreams,	interpreting	them,	sometimes	painting	them,	and
trying	to	understand	the	meaning	of	his	spontaneous	fantasies.	At	a	certain
moment	he	heard	a	female	“voice”	say,	“It	is	art.”	Surprised,	he	entered	into	a
dialogue	with	her	and	gradually	recognized	that	she	resembled	a	patient	of
his.	She	was	thus	a	sort	of	internalized	figure,	but	she	also	spoke	for	some	of
his	own	unconscious	thoughts	and	values.	In	his	own	ego	and	persona	Jung
was	self-identified	as	a	scientist,	not	an	artist.	But	this	voice	spoke	for	another
point	of	view.	While	retaining	his	conscious	ego	position,	he	began	a	dialogue
with	this	figure	and	a	study	of	her.	There	was	more	to	her	than	simply	the
internalized	image	of	his	patient.	Gradually,	through	dialogue,	she	took	shape
and	assumed	a	fuller	personality.	“I	felt	a	little	awed	by	her.	It	was	like	the
feeling	of	an	invisible	presence	in	the	room,”
2
	he	relates.
For	Jung	this	was	an	important	inner	experience	of	the	
anima,
	
and	it	has
become	a	key	reference	point	for	the	anima’s	manifestation	in	the	collective
memory	of	analytical	psychology.	Since	Jung	many	other	people	who	have
engaged	in	active	imagination	have	discovered	similar	inner	figures.
Conventionally,	for	men	the	anima	is	a	feminine	figure;	for	women	the
equivalent	inner	figure—called	the	
animus
—is	masculine.	The	anima	and
animus	are	subjective	personalities	that	represent	a	deeper	level	of	the
unconscious	than	the	shadow.	For	better	or	worse,	they	reveal	the	features	of
the	soul	and	lead	into	the	realm	of	the	collective	unconscious.

Throughout	this	chapter	I	will	refer	to	this	inner	structure	as	the	anima/us.
It	is,	like	the	shadow,	a	personality	within	the	psyche	that	does	not	match	the
self-presentation	and	self-identity	reflected	by	the	persona.	It	is	different	from
the	shadow,	however,	in	that	it	does	not	belong	to	the	ego	in	the	same	way:	it
is	more	“other”	than	the	shadow	is.	If	the	distinction	between	persona	and
shadow	is	“good	versus	bad”—plus	and	minus,	positive	and	negative	aspects
of	the	ego—the	distinction	between	ego	and	anima/us	is	marked	by	the
masculine-feminine	polarity.	It	is	not	the	difference	between	Cain	and	Abel
but	between	Solomon	and	the	Queen	of	Sheba.
Defining	Anima	and	Animus
Of	all	the	aspects	of	Jung’s	theory,	the	topic	of	this	chapter	has	become	in
many	ways	the	most	controversial,	for	it	raises	profound	gender	issues	and
suggests	essential	differences	in	the	psychology	of	men	and	women.	Whereas
this	subject	may	have	seemed	calm	and	settled	in	Jung’s	time,	today	it	stirs	a
hornet’s	nest.	To	some	contemporaries	it	seems	that	Jung	was	a	man	before
his	time	who	anticipated	and	indeed	advocated	a	type	of	protofeminism.	To
others	he	appears	to	be	a	spokesman	for	stereotypic	traditional	views	on	the
differences	between	men	and	women.	In	fact,	I	think	he	was	a	little	of	both.
In	his	later	works	Jung	refers	to	the	anima	and	animus	as	archetypal	figures
of	the	psyche.	Thus	they	lie	essentially	beyond	
the	influence	of	the	forces	that
mold	and	shape	the	consciousness	of	individuals	such	as	family,	society,
culture,	and	tradition.	Archetypes	are	not	derived	from	culture;	rather	cultural
forms	(in	Jung’s	theory)	are	derived	from	archetypes.	This	definition	of	the
anima/us	as	archetype	therefore	places	its	deepest	essence	outside	of	the
psyche	altogether,	in	the	realm	of	impersonal	spiritual	forms	and	powers.
Anima	and	animus	are	basic	life	forms,	and	they	shape	human	individuals	and
societies,	in	addition	to	other	influences	that	impact	them.	The	archetype	is,	as
we	saw	in	chapter	4,	a	
Ding	an	sich
	(Kant:	“a	thing	in	itself”),	and	therefore	it
lies	beyond	the	range	of	human	perception.	We	can	only	perceive	it	indirectly
by	noting	its	manifestations.
The	anima/us,	strictly	speaking,	is	a	scientific	hypothesis	about
“something”	that	exists	but	cannot	be	observed	directly,	like	an	unknown	star
whose	position	and	size	are	known	only	from	measurements	of	gravitational
pulls	in	its	vicinity.	And	yet,	since	the	manifestations	of	anima	and	animus,	as
Jung	noted	and	described	them,	do	in	fact	often	resemble	well-known	cultural

images	embodied	by	traditional	men	and	women,	the	question	has	been
raised:	Was	Jung	a	victim	of	his	cultural	blinders	who	inadvertently	became
the	exponent	of	cultural	stereotypes?	In	other	words,	are	the	“archetypes”	in
fact	social	constructions?	Or,	was	Jung	investigating	deeper	structures	that
perhaps	are	embedded	in	these	cultural	patterns	but	transcend	them	and	are
indeed	universal	forms	of	human	psychological	traits	and	behavior?	I	will	not
answer	this	question	definitively	in	this	chapter,	but	I	hope	to	advance	the
case	that	the	issue	is	more	complicated	and	Jung’s	thinking	more	complex
than	many	of	his	critics	have	granted.	In	the	meantime,	I	will	try	to	present	his
thought	as	clearly	as	possible.
We	will	enter	this	territory	carefully,	trying	to	grasp	Jung’s	meanings	for
these	elusive	terms	step	by	step.	If	the	places	on	the	map	of	psyche	which	we
have	examined	up	to	this	point	seem	relatively	clear	and	well-defined,	the
territory	of	anima	and	animus	seems	at	times	like	a	deep	and	tangled
wilderness.	Perhaps	this	is	as	it	should	be,	for	here	we	are	entering	the	deeper
layers	of	the	unconscious,	the	collective	unconscious,	the	territory	of	the
archetypal	images,	where	boundaries	are	blurred.
Before	approaching	the	issue	of	gender	in	relation	to	these	terms,	I	should
point	out	that	an	account	can	be	given	of	anima	and	animus	that	does	not
draw	gender	into	it	at	all.	Gender	can	be	seen	as	a	secondary	feature	of	the
anima/us,	just	as	an	object’s	essence	is	not	determined	by	blue	or	pink.	There
is	an	abstract,	structural	way	of	understanding	the	anima/us.	Because	it	is
possible	to	speak	of	this	feature	of	the	psyche	as	abstract	structure,	I	will	use,
throughout	this	chapter,	the	notation	“anima/us.”	This	indicates	a	psychic
structure	that	is	common	to	men	and	women.	The	differentiated	endings	of	-a
and	-us	will	be	used	when	I	mean	to	refer	to	the	gendered	features	of	this
inner	object.	Abstractly,	the	anima/us	is	a	psychic	structure	that	(a)	is
complementary	to	the	persona	and	(b)	links	the	ego	to	the	deepest	layer	of	the
psyche,	namely	to	the	image	and	experience	of	the	self.
As	discussed	in	the	previous	chapter,	the	persona	is	the	habitual	attitude
that	an	ego	adopts	to	meet	the	world.	It	is	a	public	personality	and	facilitates
adaptation	to	the	demands	of	physical	and	(primarily)	social	reality.	It	is	a
“functional	complex,”	to	use	Jung’s	term	from	his	definition	in	the	1921	text
Psychological	Types.
	It	operates	like	the	skin	on	the	body,	providing	a
protective	barrier	between	the	ego	and	the	outside.	The	anima/us	is	similarly	a
functional	complex,	but	one	that	is	concerned	with	adaptation	to	the	inner
world.	“The	natural	function	of	the	animus	(as	well	as	of	in	the	anima)	is	to
remain	in	place	between	individual	consciousness	and	the	collective
unconscious;	exactly	as	the	persona	is	a	sort	of	stratum	between	the	ego-

consciousness	and	the	objects	of	the	external	world.	The	animus	and	the
anima	should	function	as	a	bridge,	or	a	door,	leading	to	the	images	of	the
collective	unconscious,	as	the	persona	should	be	a	sort	of	bridge	into	the
world.”
3
	In	other	words,	the	anima/us	allows	the	ego	to	enter	into	and	to
experience	the	depths	of	the	psyche.
In	1921,	now	freed	from	his	dependence	on	Freud	and	ready	to	launch	his
own	views	on	depth	psychology,	Jung	published	
Psychological	Types,
	in
which	he	summarized	his	own	new	theory	to	date.	In	this	volume	many	new
terms	appeared	and	were	used	to	define	his	revisionist	views	on	the	nature
and	structure	of	the	psyche.	So	much	was	this	the	case,	that	he	felt	(as	I
indicated	in	
chapter	5)	a	need	to	include	a	whole	chapter	of	definitions	at	the
conclusion	of	this	work.	These	are	detailed	definitions	and	can	be	read	as	a
kind	of	early	textbook	in	analytical	psychology.	Here	he	gives	extensive
coverage	to	the	concepts	of	anima	and	animus	in	the	entries	on	“soul”	and
“soul-image.”	These	definitions,	while	somewhat	mechanical	and	simplistic,
do	help	to	provide	boundaries	and	to	give	shape	to	his	terms,	at	least	in	the
way	he	was	using	them	at	that	time.
In	approaching	the	definition	of	the	anima/us,	he	contrasts	it	with	the
persona:	“The	persona	is	exclusively	concerned	with	the	relation	to	objects,”
4
while	the	anima/us	concerns	the	ego’s	relation	to	the	subject.	“By	the	‘subject’
I	mean	first	of	all	those	vague,	dim	stirrings,	feelings,	thoughts,	and
sensations	which	flow	in	on	us	not	from	any	demonstrable	continuity	of
conscious	experience	of	the	object,	but	well	up	like	a	disturbing,	inhibiting,	or
at	times	helpful	influence	from	the	dark	inner	depths.”
5
	The	“subject”	here	is
primarily	the	world	of	the	unconscious,	not	the	ego.	This	is	the	subjective	side
of	the	psyche,	its	ground,	its	inner	space.	It	contains	“inner	objects,”	so	to
speak,	sometimes	called	by	Jung	“imagoes”	or	simply	“images”	or
“contents.”	Because	the	term	“subject,”	at	least	in	this	specific	context,	refers
to	the	unconscious,	it	follows	quite	logically	that	“just	as	there	is	a	relation	to
the	outer	object,	an	outer	attitude	[i.e.,	the	persona],	there	is	a	relation	to	the
inner	object,	an	inner	attitude.”
6
Jung	concedes	that	it	“is	readily	understandable	that	this	inner	attitude,	by
reason	of	its	extremely	intimate	and	inaccessible	nature,	is	far	more	difficult
to	discern	than	the	outer	attitude,	which	is	immediately	perceived	by
everyone.”
7
	One	can	easily	enough	observe	a	person’s	treatment	of	others,	but
it	requires	more	subtlety	to	see	how	people	treat	themselves.	What	is	their
attitude	toward	the	inner	world?	Is	it	receptive	and	warm	(as	the	persona	may
be),	or	is	it	harsh	and	hypercritical?	Many	generous	people	are	their	own

worst	enemies	within—their	own	meanest	judges	and	harshest	critics—but
this	is	concealed	behind	a	charming	and	hospitable	persona.	Or	a	person	may
be	extremely	judgmental	of	others	while	treating	his	own	inner	life	with
sentimental	self-indulgence.	One	must	know	people	well	before	learning	how
they	actually	treat	themselves	inwardly.	Do	they	take	themselves	seriously?
Do	they	treat	themselves	like	children?	The	ways	they	actually	feel	about
their	own	deeper	inner	selves	characterize	their	anima	or	animus	attitude.
Jung	says	further	in	this	passage:	“one	man	will	not	allow	himself	to	be
disturbed	in	the	slightest	by	his	inner	processes	…	another	man	is	just	as
completely	at	their	mercy	…	a	vaguely	unpleasant	sensation	puts	the	idea	into
his	head	that	he	is	suffering	from	a	secret	disease,	a	dream	fills	him	with
gloomy	forebodings	…	One	man	takes	them	as	physiological,	another
attributes	them	to	the	behaviour	of	his	neighbours,	another	finds	in	them	a
religious	revelation.”
8
	“Thus,	Jung	concludes,	the	inner	attitude	…	is
correlated	with	just	as	definite	a	functional	complex	as	the	outer	attitude.
People	who,	it	would	seem,	entirely	overlook	their	inner	psychic	processes	no
more	lack	a	typical	inner	attitude	than	the	people	who	constantly	overlook	the
outer	object	and	the	reality	of	facts	lack	a	typical	outer	one.”
9
The	above	summarizes	Jung’s	structural	definition	of	the	anima/us	as	he
presented	it	in	1921	in	
Psychological	Types.
	The	anima/us	is	an	attitude	that
governs	one’s	relationship	to	the	inner	world	of	the	unconscious—
imagination,	subjective	impressions,	ideas,	moods	and	emotions.	So	far	this
says	nothing	whatever	about	content	of	this	structure	nor	about	gender.	The
usual	shorthand	definition	is	that	the	anima	is	the	inner	feminine	for	a	man
and	the	animus	is	the	inner	masculine	for	a	woman.	But	one	can	also	simply
speak	of	them	as	functional	structures	that	serve	a	specific	purpose	in	relation
to	the	ego.	As	psychic	structure,	the	anima/us	is	the	instrument	by	which	men
and	women	enter	into	and	adjust	to	the	deeper	parts	of	their	psychological
natures.	As	the	persona	faces	out	into	the	social	world	and	assists	with
necessary	external	adaptations,	so	the	anima/us	faces	inward	to	the	inner
world	of	the	psyche	and	helps	a	person	to	adapt	to	the	demands	and
requirements	of	intuitive	thoughts,	feelings,	images,	and	emotions	that
confront	the	ego.
For	instance,	a	man	who	is	frequently	moody	is	said	to	have	an	“anima
problem.”	“He	is	in	the	anima	today,”	one	might	say	to	a	friend.	His	anima,
instead	of	helping	to	manage	emotions,	
releases	a	mood	that	seeps	like	a	gas
into	ego	consciousness	and	carries	with	it,	in	suspension	so	to	speak,	a	lot	of
raw	and	undifferentiated	affect.	This	has	been	known	to	interfere	with	ego
functioning,	to	say	the	least.	This	man’s	ego	becomes	identified	with	the

anima	personality,	which	is	as	a	rule	hypersensitive	and	soggy	with
emotionality.	His	anima	is	not	highly	developed,	and	instead	of	helping	him
to	cope	with	an	overwhelming	mood	it	draws	him	deeper	into	it.	A	man	given
to	frequent	and	intense	moodiness	has	too	close	a	relation	with	this—usually
inferior—part	of	his	personality.	Of	course	if	he	is	a	poet	like	Rilke,	who	had
an	anima	problem	of	the	first	order,	he	can	use	this	relation	creatively.	But	he
may	be	only	uncommonly	emotional	and	overreactive	to	slights	and	minor
annoyances	and	injuries	and	therefore	psychologically	dysfunctional.	His
relationships	typically	are	fraught	with	conflict	because	he	has	emotional
reactions	that	are	too	powerful	for	him	to	manage.	The	anima	overwhelms
him	rather	than	helps	him.
Similarly,	a	woman	with	an	“animus	problem”	is	also	overcome	by	her
unconscious,	typically	by	emotionally	charged	thoughts	and	opinions	which
control	her	more	than	she	controls	them.	This	is	not	very	different	from	the
anima-possessed	man,	only	the	accent	tends	to	be	more	intellectual	on	the
woman’s	side.	These	autonomous	ideas	and	opinions	end	up	disturbing	her
adaptation	to	the	world	because	they	are	delivered	with	the	emotional	energy
of	a	bully.	Often	they	wreak	havoc	on	her	relationships,	because	the	people
near	her	must	build	self-protective	shields	around	themselves	when	they	are
with	her.	They	feel	on	the	defensive	and	uncomfortable	in	her	presence.	Hard
as	she	may	want	to	be	receptive	and	intimate,	she	cannot	because	her	ego	is
subject	to	these	invasions	of	disruptive	energies	that	transform	her	into
anything	but	the	kinder,	gentler	person	she	would	like	to	be.	Instead,	she	is
abrasive	and	gripped	by	unconscious	strivings	for	power	and	control.	This	is
what	Jung	called	animus	possession.	The	animus	is	a	powerful	personality
that	is	not	congruent	with	the	ego	or	the	desired	persona.	It	is	“other.”
Men	in	the	grip	of	the	anima	tend	to	withdraw	into	hurt	feelings;	women	in
the	grip	of	the	animus	tend	to	attack.	This	is	a	
conventional	distinction
between	the	genders,	and	of	course	it	is	subject	to	revision	in	the	light	of
recent	cultural	developments.	In	both	cases,	however,	whatever	the	content	of
the	“possession”	happens	to	be,	the	inner	world	of	the	unconscious	is	not
sufficiently	held	in	check,	and	emotional	and	irrational	neediness	disturbs	and
distorts	normal	relations	with	other	people	and	with	life	in	general.	Anima/us
possession	throws	the	gates	of	the	unconscious	wide	open	and	lets	in
practically	everything	that	has	enough	energy	to	come	through.	Moods	and
whims	sweep	in	and	carry	one	away.	Impulse	control	is	minimal.	There	is	no
containment	of	thought	or	affect.	This	is	an	ego	problem,	too,	of	course—
symptomatic	of	an	undeveloped	ego	that	cannot	hold	and	contain	the	contents
that	normally	float	into	consciousness	but	need	to	be	reflected	upon	and

digested	before	being	carried	into	verbal	or	physical	action.	But	there	is	also
the	problem	of	too	little	development	in	the	anima/us	structure.	This	lack	of
development	is	like	an	undeveloped	muscle.	It	is	too	flabby	and	inadequate	to
do	its	job	when	called	upon.	Men	will	then	typically	look	for	a	woman	to	help
them	manage	their	emotions,	and	women	will	typically	find	a	man	who	can
receive	their	inspired	thoughts	and	do	something	with	them.	Thus	other
people	enter	the	game	of	ego-anima	/us	relations.
For	the	sake	of	discussion,	let	me	describe	an	
ideal
	psychological
development	(highly	theoretical	and	improbable	as	this	may	be).	The
conscious	and	unconscious	parts	of	the	psychic	system	work	together	in	a
balanced	and	harmonious	interplay,	and	this	takes	place	in	part	between	the
anima/us	and	the	persona.	Here	the	ego	is	not	flooded	by	material	from
without	or	within	but	is	rather	facilitated	and	protected	by	these	structures.
And	life	energy—libido—flows	in	a	progressive	movement	into	adaptation	to
the	tasks	and	demands	of	life.	This	is	a	picture	of	healthy,	highly	functioning
personality	with	access	to	inner	resources	and	skilled	at	outer	adjustment.	The
attitude	toward	the	outer	world	is	balanced,	and	it	is	complemented	by	an
attitude	toward	the	world	within.	Neither	is	out	of	joint	or	inadequately
developed.	The	persona	is	able	to	adapt	to	the	demands	of	life	and	to	manage
stable	relations	with	the	surrounding	social	and	natural	worlds.	
Internally
there	is	well	managed	and	steady	access	to	a	wellspring	of	energy	and
creative	inspiration.	Outer	and	inner	adaptations	are	adequate	to	the	demands
of	life.
Why	isn’t	life	more	like	this?	Actually,	many	people	experience	something
like	this	from	time	to	time	in	their	lives.	These	are	the	good	periods	of	work
and	love.	But	these	are	often	relatively	shortlived	interludes	in	a	much	more
conflict-ridden	picture.	One	large	reason	for	this	is	that	we	develop	unevenly.
And	very	little	attention	is	paid	in	our	contemporary	culture	to	true	inner
development—to	what	Jung	called	“individual	culture”	as	opposed	to
collective	(persona-based)	culture.	Inside,	most	of	us	are	extremely	primitive.
It	is	only	when	the	persona	is	stripped	away	and	the	anima/us	opens	the	gates
to	the	deeper	layers	of	the	unconscious—when,	as	at	midlife,	for	example,	the
ego	is	torn	by	conflict	between	persona	and	anima/us—that	the	need	for	inner
development	becomes	an	acute	issue	and	is	taken	seriously.	While	this	may
look	like	an	outbreak	of	neurosis,	it	may	well	be	the	call	for	further
individuation,	and	the	challenge	to	take	a	deeper	journey	into	the	interior	on
the	road	toward	individual	development.

Gender	and	Anima	and	Animus
Turning	now	to	the	views	on	anima	and	animus	that	imply	gender	directly,	it
is	first	of	all	noteworthy	that	these	are	terms	taken	from	the	Latin.	Like	most
cultivated	Europeans	of	his	day,	Jung	was	fluent	in	the	classical	languages
and	he	found	it	quite	natural	and	convenient	to	use	these	sources	to	name
psychic	figures	and	structures.	Anima	means	“soul”	in	Latin,	and	animus
means	“spirit.”	(In	German	these	appear	as	
Seele
	and	
Geist.
)	From	one	point
of	view,	there	is	not	actually	much	difference	in	meaning	between	these	two
Latin	terms.	If	one	thinks	of	the	
soul	(anima)
	as	leaving	the	body	at	death,	as
the	Greeks	and	Romans	supposed,	it	is	equivalent	to	saying	that	the	
spirit
(animus)
	has	departed.	Spirit	is	often	depicted	as	breath	or	air,	and	to	catch	a
person’s	last	breath	as	it	leaves	the	body	is	to	catch	the	person’s	soul.	Thus	the
terms	spirit	and	soul	are	nearly	interchangeable.	Also,	both	words	refer	to	the
inner	world	of	persons,	to	the	soulful	and	the	spiritual.	
The	questions	to	ask
about	one’s	own	anima	and	animus	are:	What	kind	of	soul	do	I	have?	What
kind	of	spirit?
Of	course	Jung	is	not	speaking	of	the	religious	meaning	of	soul	when	he
uses	the	term	anima.	He	does	not	mean	the	immortal	part	of	a	human	being,
as	traditional	religious	writers	use	this	term.	He	is	capturing	the	term	for
psychology,	and	by	it	he	means	to	denote	the	hidden	inner	side	of	a	man’s
personality.	Similarly,	with	the	term	animus	he	is	not	referring	to	something
metaphysical	and	transcendent—the	Holy	Spirit,	for	instance—but	rather	to
the	hidden	inner	side	of	a	woman’s	personality.
The	endings	of	the	words	connote	a	gender	difference.	The	ending	of	anim-
a	is	feminine	and	the	ending	of	anim-us	is	masculine.	
(Seele
	and	Geist	are
similarly	feminine	and	masculine	respectively	in	the	German	language.)	So
by	assigning	these	terms,	the	one	to	men	and	the	other	to	women,	Jung	was
setting	up	his	theory	to	show	fundamental	(that	is,	archetypal)	differences
between	the	sexes.	While	he	would	often	say	that	all	humans	beings	share	the
same	archetypes,	in	this	instance	he	is	saying	that	men	have	one	and	women
another.	Had	Jung	not	wanted	to	do	this	he	could	easily	have	used	the	same
term	for	both.	Or	he	could	have	invented	a	neutral	term,	such	as	“anime.”	He
did	not,	however,	and	this	is	significant.	How	and	why	are	men	different	from
women	in	this	essential	inner	way?
Jung	argues	that	both	genders	have	both	masculine	and	feminine
components	and	qualities.	In	some	passages	he	links	this	to	the	fact	that	each
has	both	masculine	and	feminine	genetic	material.	Their	empirical	differences

are	only	a	matter	of	degree.	In	this	emphasis	he	is	perhaps	a	protofeminist.
Jung	seems	to	avoid	dividing	the	human	race	into	two	clearly	different	gender
groups	with	little	in	common.	In	his	theory,	both	men	and	women	are	both
masculine	and	feminine.	However,	these	qualities	are	distributed	differently.
And	this	difference	is	archetypal,	not	societal	or	cultural.	It	is	not	a	difference,
in	other	words,	that	can	be	erased	by	changes	in	social	policy.	In	this	respect
he	runs	afoul	of	at	least	those	contemporary	feminists	who	want	to	insist	on
little	or	no	essential	psychological	difference	between	men	and	women.	Jung
says	that	men	are	masculine	on	the	outside	and	feminine	on	
the	inside,	and
that	women	are	the	other	way	around.	Women	are	relational	and	receptive	in
their	ego	and	persona,	and	they	are	hard	and	penetrating	on	the	other	side	of
their	personality;	men	are	tough	and	aggressive	on	the	outside	and	soft	and
relational	within.	Take	away	the	personas	of	male	and	female	adults,	and	the
perception	of	gender	will	be	reversed.	Women	will	be	harder	and	more
controlling	than	men,	and	men	will	be	more	nurturing	and	relational	than
women.
Statistically	at	least,	if	not	for	each	individual,	Jung’s	definition	appears	to
be	the	rule.	If	politics	are	guided	by	perceptions	at	the	persona	level,	which	is
about	as	much	as	people	will	reveal	to	pollsters,	the	campaigns	of	savvy
public	officials	are	geared	to	the	view	that	to	win	the	votes	of	women	they
must	show	compassion,	sentiment,	and	a	desire	for	unity	and	tolerance;	if
they	are	after	the	male	vote	they	must	demonstrate	logic,	competitiveness,
toughness,	and	moral	judgment.
10
	On	the	other	hand,	according	to	Jung,	the
inner	worlds	of	men	and	women—their	hidden	personalities,	their
unconscious	other	selves—would	be	the	exact	opposite	of	this.	In	other
words,	human	beings	are	more	complex	than	public	appearance	and	polls
make	out.	When	women	look	within,	they	come	upon	(and	reveal	to	those
intimately	involved	with	them)	logic,	competitiveness,	toughness,	and	moral
judgment	aplenty.	Likewise	men	show	compassion,	sentiment,	and	a	desire
for	unity	and	tolerance.	In	part,	it	is	this	complexity	of	human	beings	that
Jung	is	trying	to	sort	out	with	his	theory	of	anima	and	animus.
In	his	1921	definition	of	anima	and	animus,	Jung	offers	some
generalizations	from	his	own	observation	and	experience.	These	give	a
glimpse	of	what	he	would	focus	on	and	emphasize	in	many	of	his	other	later
writings.	“As	to	the	character	of	the	anima,	my	experience	confirms	the	rule
that	it	is,	by	and	large,	complementary	to	the	character	of	the	persona.	The
anima	usually	contains	all	those	common	human	qualities	which	the
conscious	attitude	lacks.”
11
	He	had	not	yet	at	this	point	put	his	notion	of
shadow	in	place.	This	distinction	between	shadow	and	anima/us	will	be	sorted

out	later,	and	the	shadow	will	take	up	many	of	the	contents	that	are
complementary	to	the	persona	but	are	excluded	from	
conscious	identity
because	they	are	incompatible	with	the	persona	image.	In	this	passage,	Jung	is
thinking	about	the	type	of	counter-persona	that	the	shadow	will	later	describe,
rather	than	about	complementary	attitudes	toward	outer	and	inner	objects.
“The	anima	usually	contains	all	those	common	human	qualities	which	the
conscious	attitude	lacks.	The	tyrant	tormented	by	bad	dreams,	gloomy
forebodings,	and	inner	fears	is	a	typical	figure	…	his	anima	contains	all	those
fallible	human	qualities	his	persona	lacks.	If	the	persona	is	intellectual,	the
anima	will	quite	certainly	be	sentimental.”	
12
	While	these	features	would	later
be	assigned	to	the	shadow,	it	is	this	line	of	thought	that	leads	to	the	gender
issue:	“The	complementary	character	of	the	anima	also	affects	the	sexual
character,	as	I	have	proved	to	myself	beyond	a	doubt.	A	very	feminine	woman
has	a	masculine	soul,	and	a	very	masculine	man	has	a	feminine	soul.”
13
	Here
it	is	only	because	the	anima/animus	structure	is	seen	as	complimentary	to	the
persona	that	the	gender	features	become	included	in	its	image.	If	a	man’s
persona	contains	the	qualities	and	features	commonly	associated	with
masculinity	in	a	particular	culture,	then	the	features	of	personality	that	do	not
conform	with	that	image	will	be	suppressed	and	gathered	together	in	the
complementary	unconscious	structure,	the	anima.	The	anima	then	contains	the
features	that	are	typically	identified	as	feminine	in	that	culture.	So	a	man	very
masculine	in	the	persona	will	have	be	equally	feminine	in	the	anima.
But	what	about	women	who	are	not	very	feminine	and	men	who	are	not
very	masculine	in	their	personas?	Does	a	not-very-feminine	woman	have	a
nonmasculine	animus,	and	a	not-very-masculine	man	have	a	nonfeminine
anima?	Jung	would	be	obliged	to	follow	this	line	of	thought,	given	his
premises.	Some	individuals	may	not	be	very	much	internally	polarized
between	masculine	and	feminine	features.	The	more	androgynous	style	of
recent	decades	has	clearly	moved	away	from	the	classic	gender	polarization
of	macho	males	and	passive	females.	Women	dress	and	behave	in	more
masculine	ways	than	they	did	in	earlier	generations,	and	many	men	are
similarly	more	feminine	in	their	personas	than	their	forefathers	were.	How
does	this	affect	the	features	of	the	anima	and	animus?	As	the	predominant
collective	
images	for	correct	male	and	female	dress	and	behavior	change,	the
inner	images	of	anima	and	animus	would	also	shift	accordingly.	According	to
the	rule,	whatever	is	left	out	of	the	conscious	adaptation	to	the	regnant	culture
of	the	individual	person	is	relegated	to	the	unconscious	and	will	collect
around	the	structure	that	Jung	named	anima/us.	For	an	extremely	effeminate
man	the	inner	attitude	(anima)	will	be	masculine	in	quality	because	this	is

what	has	been	left	out	of	the	persona	adaptation.
What	do	these	gender	qualities	actually	mean,	then,	when	it	comes	to
defining	the	nature	and	quality	of	the	inner	attitude,	the	anima	and	animus?
Masculine	has	been	almost	universally	defined	by	such	adjectives	as	active,
hard,	penetrating,	logical,	assertive,	dominant;	feminine	has	been	widely
defined	as	receptive,	soft,	giving,	nourishing,	relational,	emotional,	empathic.
Whether	housed	in	a	male	or	female	body,	these	categories	of	attributes	seem
to	remain	stable.	The	debate	is	whether	these	categories	should	be	associated
with	gender.	Some	women	are	more	masculine	than	feminine	in	their
personas,	some	men	more	feminine	than	masculine,	but	this	does	not	change
their	genders	as	biological	females	and	males.	The	Chinese	terms	Yin	and
Yang	have	been	proposed	as	more	suitable	and	neutral	terms	for	these	groups
of	attributes,	and	they	might	be	used	in	exchange	for	the	terms	masculine	and
feminine.	Either	way	we	are	speaking	of	the	same	qualities.	Taking	off	from
there,	Jung	would	say	that	the	inner	attitude	shows	the	qualities	that	are	left
out	in	the	persona:	if	a	person	is	Yang	in	the	persona,	he	or	she	will	by	Yin	in
the	anima/us	structure.	But	the	inner	attitude,	because	it	is	in	the	unconscious,
is	less	under	the	control	of	the	ego	and	is	less	refined	and	differentiated	than
the	persona	is.	So	it	is	an	inferior	Yang	that	appears	in	a	Yin-dominated
persona	individual,	and	an	inferior	Yin	that	crops	up	in	unguarded	moments
of	a	Yang-dominated	consciousness.
Thus	a	very	feminine	woman	has	a	masculine	soul,	but	not	a	very	refined
one.	In	her	relationship	to	the	world	she	holds	a	distinctive	and	marked
feminine	attitude,	which	we	recognize	and	describe	as	receptive,	warm,
nurturing,	and	embracing.	Within	that	person	there	is	a	very	different	inner
attitude:	hard,	critical,	
aggressive,	domineering.	The	inner	face	of	that	very
feminine-looking	woman	reveals	a	personality	made	of	steel.	Similarly	the
very	masculine	appearing	man,	who	is	hard-driving,	tough-minded,	detached,
and	aggressive	contains	an	inner	personality	that	is	sentimental,	touchy,	easily
wounded,	and	vulnerable.	The	macho	man	loves	his	mother,	loves	his
daughter,	loves	his	horse,	but	refrains	from	admitting	it	(even	to	himself),	and
in	public	he	will	shun	those	feelings	although	in	private	he	may	give	way
occasionally	and	blubber	into	his	beer.	“This	contrast	is	due	to	the	fact	that	a
man	is	not	in	all	things	wholly	masculine,	but	also	has	certain	feminine	traits.
The	more	masculine	his	outer	attitude	is,	the	more	his	feminine	traits	are
obliterated:	instead,	they	appear	in	his	unconscious.	This	explains	why	it	is
just	those	very	virile	men	who	are	most	subject	to	characteristic	weaknesses;
their	attitude	to	the	unconscious	has	a	womanish	weakness	and	impression-
ability.	Conversely,	it	is	often	just	the	most	feminine	women	who,	in	their

inner	lives,	display	an	intractability,	an	obstinacy,	and	a	willfulness	that	are	to
be	found	with	comparable	intensity	only	in	a	man’s	outer	attitude.	These	are
masculine	traits	which,	excluded	from	the	womanly	outer	attitude,	have
become	qualities	in	her	soul.”
14
	It	is	obvious	that	Jung	is	not	speaking	here	of
the	inner	masculine	and	feminine	in	their	highest	and	most	developed	forms
but	rather	as	caricatures,	inferior	versions	of	masculinity	and	femininity	that
are	based	on	undeveloped	parts	of	the	individual’s	personality.
The	Development	of	the	Anima/us
It	is	precisely	the	above	lack	of	development	and	inferiority,	however,	that
gives	the	anima	and	animus	such	potential	for	further	development	in	the
psyche.	Because	the	persona	is	based	on	collective	values	and	features—
whatever	happens	to	be	“in”	in	the	way	of	male	and	female	behavior	and
attitudes	at	a	given	moment	in	culture—the	potential	for	becoming	unique	as
an	individual	resides	not	in	the	persona	but	elsewhere	in	the	psyche.	As	long
as	a	person’s	ego-consciousness	is	identified	with	the	persona	and	
feels	at	one
with	it,	there	is	no	room	for	qualities	of	personality	and	expression	of
individuality	that	would	depart	from	the	collective	images.	The	impulse	to	be
an	individual	is	suppressed	(or	repressed	altogether)	for	the	sake	of
adaptation,	in	order	to	“fit	in.”	What	these	individual	qualities	may	be	in	a
particular	case	cannot	be	determined	by	examining	the	persona.	They	may	be
somewhat	included	in	the	persona	presentation	or	they	may	be	almost
completely	excluded.	“This	is	a	fundamental	rule	which	my	experience	has
borne	out	over	and	over	again	…	as	regards	individual	qualities,	nothing	can
be	deduced	about	them	[from	the	persona]	…	We	can	only	be	certain	that
when	a	man	is	identical	with	his	persona,	his	individual	qualities	will	be
associated	with	the	anima.”
15
This	is	the	man	in	the	gray	flannel	suit,	who	rides	the	train	to	work	every
morning	and	is	so	closely	identified	with	his	collective	role	that	he	has	no
personality	outside	of	its	framework.	His	inherent	uniqueness	will	show	up	in
the	anima:	he	will	be	(perhaps	secretly)	attracted	by	extremely
unconventional	women	because	they	carry	the	anima	projection	for	him,	they
portray	his	soul,	they	capture	his	spirit	of	adventure	and	daring.	Precisely	the
same	rule	holds	true	for	women:	when	they	are	collective	and	conventional	in
their	persona	presentations,	they	harbor	a	secret	inner	lover	(often
unconscious	to	them)	who	is	anything	but	the	portrait	of	their	conventional

mate.	When	he	appears	he	will	mesmerize	them	and	lead	them	into	abandon.
This	fundamental	rule	of	the	psyche	can	be	observed	operating	in	life,	and	it
is	portrayed	in	countless	novels,	operas,	and	films.	The	outcome	of	an	actual
encounter	with	someone	who	is	a	carrier	of	the	anima	or	animus	projection
“frequently	gives	rise	in	dreams	to	the	symbol	of	psychic	pregnancy,	a	symbol
that	goes	back	to	the	primordial	image	of	the	hero’s	birth.	The	child	that	is	to
be	born	signifies	the	individuality,	which,	though	present,	is	not	yet
conscious.”
16
	The	real	psychic	purpose	of	the	conventional	man’s	affair	with
his	very	unconventional	anima	woman	is	to	produce	a	symbolic	child,	which
represents	a	union	of	the	opposites	in	his	personality	and	is	therefore	a	symbol
of	the	self.
It	is	this	encounter	of	the	ego	with	the	anima	or	animus	that	Jung	thought
was	so	rich	with	potential	for	psychological	development.	The	meeting	with
the	anima/us	represents	a	connection	to	the	unconscious	even	deeper	than	that
of	the	shadow.	In	the	case	of	the	shadow,	it	is	a	meeting	with	the	disdained
and	rejected	pieces	of	the	total	psyche,	the	inferior	and	unwanted	qualities.	In
the	meeting	with	the	anima/us,	it	is	a	contact	with	levels	of	the	psyche	which
has	the	potential	to	lead	into	the	deepest	and	highest	(at	any	rate	the	furthest)
reaches	that	the	ego	can	attain.
In	order	to	pursue	this	intuition,	however,	Jung	had	to	change	course	and
begin	to	redefine	the	nature	of	the	anima/us.	The	shadow	does	not	usually
lead	one	much	past	the	parts	of	the	psyche	rejected	from	the	persona,	unless	it
takes	one	to	an	encounter	with	absolute	evil.	The	anima/us	structure,	on	the
other	hand,	has	the	potential	to	bridge	to	the	self,	a	much	further	reach.	The
anima/us	cannot	then	be	simply	the	converse	of	the	persona,	a	sort	of	negative
reflection	of	the	collective	attitudes	of	the	times.	It	must	be	more	deeply
anchored	in	the	collective	unconscious	and	in	the	structures	of	archetype	and
archetypal	image.	Its	roots	must	extend	further	out	and	down	into	the	depths
than	those	of	the	shadow.	In	1921	Jung	was	just	on	the	verge	of	tracking	these
trails	into	the	hinterland	of	the	collective	unconscious.	He	gives	a	hint	of	what
is	to	come:	“in	the	same	way	as	the	persona,	the	instrument	of	adaptation	to
the	environment,	is	strongly	influenced	by	environmental	conditions,	the
anima	is	shaped	by	the	unconscious	and	its	qualities.”
17
	Here	the	concept	of
the	anima	changes	a	small	but	highly	significant	bit.	Instead	of	simply	being
the	complement	of	the	persona,	and	therefore	critically	shaped	and	colored	by
what	is	in	the	persona,	the	anima	is	now	seen	as	shaped	by	the	unconscious
and	its	qualities.	Later,	when	Jung	comes	to	conceive	of	the	animus	and
anima	as	archetypal	images	which	receive	their	forms	from	the	spiritual	end
of	the	psychic	spectrum	(see	chapter	4),	he	will	conclude	that	the	anima/us	is

shaped	by	the	archetype	more	than	by	the	collective	consensus	of	the	time.
The	anima	and	animus	will	become	enduring	forms	of	psyche,	powers	that
shape	the	psyche	as	much	as	they	are	shaped	by	it,	dynamic	forces	that	can
break	the	forms	of	culture	and	
impose	their	own	agendas	upon	a	surprised	and
sometimes	unwilling	ego.
“Every	man	carries	within	him	the	eternal	image	of	woman;	not	the	image
of	this	or	that	particular	woman,	but	a	definitive	feminine	image,”
18
	Jung
writes	in	1925	in	an	essay	on	marriage.	This	has	come	to	be	the	more	or	less
standard	definition	of	the	anima	in	analytical	psychology.	Here	Jung	is
pointing	to	the	archetypal	nature	of	the	anima/us,	and	he	leaves	aside	the	way
in	which	this	inner	attitude	is	complementary	to	the	persona.	He	goes	on	to
say	that	this	is	“an	hereditary	factor	of	primordial	origin”	and	offers	an	image
of	woman	
as	she	appears	to	man
	and	not	as	she	is	in	herself.	Similarly,	the
animus	is	a	woman’s	internal	image	of	the	male	personality.	The	images,
thoughts,	and	assumptions	generated	by	these	internal	structures	are	behind
all	the	confusions	and	obfuscations	between	men	and	women.	They
misunderstand	one	another	because	they	are	often	relating	to	
images
	of	the
other	sex	rather	than	to	actual	people.	It	is	evident	how	these	inner	structures
can	distort	reality	and	cause	misperceptions	between	otherwise	fairly	rational
and	well-meaning	individuals.	The	male	and	female	images	housed	in	the
unconscious	of	each	gender	respectively	are	primordial	and	relatively
unchanged	by	historical	and	cultural	circumstance.	They	are	close	to
permanently	stable	images	that	repeat	their	portraits	in	individual	human
psyches	from	generation	to	generation.	What	confused	Plato	and	Socrates
about	women	is	the	same	as	the	anima	image	that	creates	pitfalls	for	men
today.	And	the	expectations	and	longings	that	filled	the	heart	of	Mary
Magdalene	continue	to	infiltrate	the	consciousness	of	modern	women	in	spite
of	the	vast	cultural	and	social	distances	that	separate	them.	The	anima/us	is
the	great	creator	of	illusion	that	provides	chuckles	for	the	jaded	and
heartbreak	for	the	naive.
“The	projection-making	factor	is	the	anima,	or	rather	the	unconscious	as
represented	by	the	anima,”
19
	Jung	writes	from	the	vantage	point	of	old	age	in
1950	in	
Aion,
	where	he	attempts	to	offer	once	again	a	definition	of	this
elusive	inner	factor.	Jung	had	always	held	that	projections	are	created	by	the
unconscious	and	not	by	the	ego.	We	are	not	responsible	for	our	projections,
only	for	
not	becoming	conscious	of	them,	taking	them	back,	or	analyzing
them.	They	occur	spontaneously	and	create	a	view	of	the	world	and	of	reality
that	is	based	on	unconscious	images	and	structures	rather	than	on	tested
perceptions	of	reality.	Jung	now	locates	the	origin	of	all	projections	in	the

anima/us,	thereby	highlighting	the	dynamic	and	active	nature	of	this	psychic
factor.
We	are	of	course	projecting	constantly,	and	our	views	of	life,	of	other
people,	and	of	the	way	the	world	is	constructed	are	made	up	quite	importantly
of	unconscious	contents	that	are	projected	into	the	environment	and	clung	to
as	absolute	verities.	The	anima/us,	Jung	says	in	this	passage,	is	like	Maya,	the
Indian	Goddess	who	creates	illusory	worlds,	and	the	ego	ends	up	inhabiting	a
world	that	is	largely	based	on	projections.	Jung	had	learned	this	not	primarily
from	study	of	Eastern	religions	but	from	his	own	firsthand	experience	as	a
psychiatrist	and	analyst.	It	is	amazing	how	distorted	some	people’s	views
really	are.	And	it	is	equally	remarkable	that	all	of	us	believe	in	our	own	views
absolutely	even	when	we	find	serious	flaws	in	them.	It	is	rare	that	we	question
a	set	of	basic	assumptions.
Raising	Consciousness	with	Anima/us
The	anima/us	image,	based	on	the	archetypal	structures	underlying	the
psyche,	assumes	particular	shape	and	form	by	being	filtered	through	the
psychic	system	and	perceived	by	ego	consciousness.	If	the	image	of	the
shadow	instills	fear	and	dread,	the	image	of	the	anima/us	usually	brings
excitement	and	stimulates	desire	for	union.	It	engenders	attraction.	Where
there	is	anima/us,	we	want	to	go,	we	want	to	be	a	part	of	it,	we	want	to	join	it,
if	we	are	not	too	timid	or	afraid	of	adventure.	The	charismatic	charge	that
electrifies	an	audience	when	a	great	orator	casts	his	spell	enlists	the	anima/us
and	constellates	its	presence.	The	audience	wants	to	believe,	and	individuals
will	follow	the	clarion	call	to	action.	A	perception	of	reality	is	created	and
conviction	follows	upon	the	strong	emotional	command	of	the	anima/us.	The
anima/us	is	therefore	transformative.
For	purposes	of	psychological	development	and	increase	of	consciousness,
however,	the	essential	ego	action	is	to	engage	the	anima/us	in	a	dialectical
process	and	not	to	follow	the	call	immediately	to	action.	This	process	of
dialogue	and	confrontation	is	called	by	Jung	an	
Auseinandersetzung.
	This	is	a
German	word	that	means	literally	“taking	something	to	pieces”	and	refers	to
the	process	that	takes	place	when	two	people	strongly	engage	one	another	in
dialogue	or	negotiation,	neither	one	fleeing	the	conflict.	As	they	stand	head	to
head	and	have	it	out	physically	or	verbally,	the	differences	between	them	that
were	at	first	gross	and	barely	articulate	become	more	differentiated.	Lines	are

drawn,	distinctions	made,	clarity	eventually	achieved.	What	began	as	a	highly
emotional	confrontation	turns	into	a	conscious	relationship	between	two	very
different	personalities.	Perhaps	an	agreement	is	reached,	a	contract	drawn	up
and	signed.
So	it	is	with	the	engagement	between	ego	and	anima/us.	This	is	the	work	of
raising	consciousness,	of	becoming	aware	of	projections,	of	challenging	our
most	romantic	and	carefully	guarded	illusions.	To	have	an
Auseinandersetzung
	with	the	anima/us	is	to	dismember	the	illusory	world	of
unconscious	fantasy.	It	is	also	to	allow	oneself	to	experience	most	profoundly
the	heights	and	depths	of	one’s	own	mental	universe,	the	unconscious
assumptions	that	keep	us	salivating	for	more	when	we	are	already	overfed,
that	keep	us	lusting	although	we	should	have	long	since	been	satisfied,	that
drive	us	to	repeat	endlessly	the	emotionally	engorged	patterns	in	the	iron
chain	of	stimulus-response	sequences.	Dungeons	and	dragons,	myths	and
fairytales,	romantic	excess	and	sarcastic	recriminations	are	all	a	part	of	the
world	woven	in	our	psychic	interiors	by	the	anima/us.	At	most	we	may	feign
to	give	it	up	while	clinging	all	the	more	tenaciously	to	our	most	precious	self-
deceptions	and	illusions.	“What	we	can	discover	about	them	[anima	and
animus]	from	the	conscious	side	is	so	slight	as	to	be	almost	imperceptible.	It
is	only	when	we	throw	light	into	the	dark	depths	of	the	psyche	and	explore	the
strange	and	tortuous	paths	of	human	fate	that	it	gradually	becomes	clear	to	us
how	immense	is	the	influence	wielded	by	these	two	factors	
that	complement
our	conscious	life.”
20
	This	is	perhaps	a	reply	to	Freud	who	held	that	character
was	fate.	In	Jung’s	view,	the	anima/us	is	fate.	We	are	guided	to	our	fates	by
the	images	of	archetypal	powers	far	beyond	our	conscious	will	or	knowledge.
In	the	
Aion
	text,	which	is	arguably	the	master	text	on	anima/us	in	Jung’s
writings,	Jung	also	acknowledges	the	centrality	of	relationship	in	the	process
of	becoming	conscious	of	the	hidden	territory	within	our	psyches.	“I	should
like	to	emphasize,”	he	writes,	“that	the	…	shadow	can	be	realized	only
through	a	relation	to	a	partner,	and	anima	and	animus	only	through	a	relation
to	a	partner	of	the	opposite	sex,	because	only	in	such	a	relation	do	their
projections	become	operative.”
21
	As	I	said	earlier,	we	might	need	to	revise
this	point	in	light	of	contemporary	developments	in	gender	identity,	where	the
anima/us	images	are	sometimes	carried	by	members	of	the	same	sex.
Nevertheless,	the	point	is	that	it	is	in	emotional	relationships	that	these
developments	of	consciousness	become	possible.	Becoming	conscious	is	not
a	project	carried	out	in	isolation,	although	it	does	require	a	good	deal	of
introspection	to	bring	it	to	its	full	flowering.	But	experience	must	precede
insight.	The	shadow	is	experienced	in	projection	upon	someone	who	captures

those	qualities	of	the	personal	unconscious.	Similarly	the	anima/us	is	captured
in	projection	by	a	person	who	bears	its	traits	and	features	to	some	quite
important	extent,	a	person	who	can	evoke	the	response	of	the	unconscious
from	this	sector.	When	this	happens,	Jung	continues,	the	psychic	constellation
is	such	that	three	figures	become	relevant:	“The	recognition	of	the	anima
gives	rise,	in	a	man,	to	a	triad,	one	third	of	which	is	transcendent:	the
masculine	subject,	the	opposing	feminine	subject,	and	the	transcendent	anima.
With	a	woman	the	situation	is	reversed.”
22
	This	assumes	a	considerable
degree	of	consciousness	because	generally	the	projection-carrier	and	the
projection	are	fused,	anima/us	and	other	subjects	becoming	one.	Here	Jung
assumes	a	degree	of	separation,	however,	such	that	there	is	(1)	a	conscious
ego	along	with	its	personal	subjectivity,	(2)	another	person,	the	partner,	with
her/his	conscious	ego	and	personal	subjectivity,	and	(3)	the	archetypal	image
of	the	anima/us.	This	triad	is	completed,	Jung	writes,	by	a	fourth	figure,	the
Wise	Old	Man	in	
the	male	instance	and	the	Chthonic	Mother	in	the	female.
The	anima/us	and	the	wisdom	figures	are	transcendent,	in	the	sense	of
belonging	essentially	to	the	unconscious	and	originating	in	the	realm	of	spirit,
while	the	ego	and	the	partner	are	the	conscious	persons	involved	in	the
emotional	relationship	that	has	stimulated	this	constellation.	In	the	presence
of	this	quaternity,	we	find	the	numinous	experience	of	the	self,	as	a
relationship.	Provided	that	enough	consciousness	prevails	to	see	the
differences	between	human	and	archetypal	features	in	this	situation	of	love
and	attraction,	there	is	the	opportunity	here	for	a	full	experience	of	the	self
(see	chapter	7).
The	complicating	feature	is	that	this	experience	of	the	anima/	us-in-
projection	happens	to	people	at	many	stages	of	psychological	maturity.	If	it	is
only	a	matter	of	fascination	and	falling	in	love,	it	can	take	place	in	childhood
between	parents	and	children;	then	it	happens	again	(classically	and	intensely)
in	adolescence;	and	fortunately	it	continues	to	happen	as	people	move	into
adulthood.	It	even	continues	into	old	age	(Goethe	is	reported	to	have
whispered	a	prayer	of	thanks	in	his	seventies	that	he	was	still	able	to	fall	in
love	with	a	young	woman).	The	anima/us	is	eternally	active	in	psychological
life,	and	its	absence	defines	the	nature	of	depression.	Beyond	the	sexuality	of
the	body,	this	is	the	psyche’s	sexuality.	It	begins	before	the	physical	organism
is	ready	for	sexual	experience	and	continues	to	be	vibrantly	active	beyond	the
physical	body’s	ability	to	perform	the	rigors	of	the	sexual	act.	Yet	to	get	the
full	psychological	benefit	of	the	anima/us	experience,	a	person	must	have
arrived	at	an	unusually	advanced	level	of	consciousness.	The	ability	to
differentiate	between	projection	and	projection-carrier,	between	fantasy	and

reality,	is	rare	indeed.	So	the	realization	of	what	Jung	is	speaking	of—the
quaternity	involved	in	this	constellation	and	the	realization	of	the
transcendent	features	in	the	experience—is	reserved	for	the	few	individuals
with	the	kind	of	subtle	psychological	discernment	that	pertains	to	Kundalini
masters	and	others	like	them.	For	the	rest,	the	anima/us	is	Maya,	the	creator	of
illusions,	the	mystifier,	the	trickster,	the	ever-receding	mirage	of	the	eternal
beloved.	To	see	through	the	anima/us	game	of	illusions	without	recognizing
the	
transcendent	figures	at	work	leads	to	cynicism	and	despair:	The	anima	is
truly	
la	belle	dame	sans	merci.
Sexuality	and	Relationships
For	good	reason	many	people	steer	clear	of	the	shoals	of	the	anima/us
experience.	The	native	defenses	of	the	ego	hold	this	temptation	at	a	distance.
Little	boys	run	away	from	little	girls	who	are	too	powerful	and	attractive,
knowing	intuitively	they	are	not	able	to	meet	the	challenge.	Grown	men	are
sometimes	wise	enough	to	do	the	same,	for	the	anima	is	a	wrecker	of
conventional	marriages	and	careers.	Women	too	will	resist	the	call	of	the
Dionysian	animus	drawing	them	toward	ecstasy	and	promises	of	fulfillment
by	abandoning	themselves	to	love,	for	here	also	lie	the	dangers	of
dismemberment	and	madness.	It	is	not	without	reason	that	many	have	prayed
to	be	delivered	from	temptations	beyond	their	ability	to	remain	standing.	One
of	Jung’s	favorite	illustrations	of	the	power	of	the	anima	was	Rider	Haggard’s
She
,	a	second-rate	novel	that	depicts	an	immortal	
femme	fatale
	in	the	wilds	of
Africa	whose	commands	must	be	obeyed.	(“She	who	must	be	obeyed”	is	not
simply	a	humorous	appellation	for	Rumpole’s	bossy	wife;	the	phrase	comes
from	Haggard’s	novel.)	She	is	an	eternally	dying	and	resurrecting	goddess
who	leads	men	into	the	flames	of	passion	and	finally	to	their	destruction.	But
Jung	also	felt	that	if	one	was	able	to	endure	the	fires	of	emotion	and	passion,
one	could	be	transformed.	The	experience	of	the	archetype,	of	the	collective
unconscious	and	its	powers,	can	lead	to	a	new	state	of	consciousness	in	which
the	reality	of	the	psyche	becomes	as	convincing	to	the	ego	as	the	reality	of	the
material	world	is	to	the	senses.	The	anima/us,	once	experienced	as
transcendent	and	recognized	as	Maya,	becomes	the	bridge	to	a	wholly	new
apprehension	of	the	world.	The	anima/us	experience	is	the	Royal	Way	(the	
via
regia)
	to	the	self.
Jung’s	anima/us	theory	seems	in	part	to	be	a	highly	imaginative	variation

on	Freud’s	old	theme	of	sexuality	as	the	central	source	of	libido.	But	in
human	sexuality	Jung	sees	a	good	deal	more	than	animals	rutting	in	heat	and
trying	to	relieve	themselves	
of	tension	or	to	pursue	pleasure.	Psychic
attractors	are	involved,	and	when	these	are	distinguished	from	the
accompanying	biological	activity,	the	image	emerges.	This	image	is	a	psychic
fact	whose	source	lies	at	the	archetypal	end	of	the	psychic	spectrum.	It	is
wedded	to	the	sexual	instinct,	and	this	combination	gives	the	anima/us	its
driving	physical	power.
Human	sexuality	is	guided	by	the	archetypal	image,	but	the	image	is	not
reducible	to	the	drive.	We	are	attracted	to	certain	people.	Why	does	one
choose	this	person	for	a	soulmate	and	not	another?	This	is	governed	by	the
images	that	are	projected.	Typically,	“the	animus	likes	to	project	itself	upon
‘intellectuals’	and	all	kinds	of	‘heroes’,	including	tenors,	artists,	sporting
celebrities,	etc.	The	anima	has	a	predilection	for	everything	that	is
unconscious,	dark,	equivocal,	and	unrelated	[viz.,	at	a	loose	end]	in	woman,
and	also	for	her	vanity,	frigidity,	helplessness,	and	so	forth.”
23
	Why	do	such
difficult	women	attract	men	so	frequently	and	with	such	ease?	Why	is	it	that
strong	women	often	do	not	attract	men?	Jung	suggests	that	this	predilection
for	weak	and	helpless	women	is	based	on	an	anima	projection,	the	anima
being	undifferentiated	and	inferior	in	the	unconscious	of	a	strongly	male-
identified	person.	Age-old	wisdom	tells	women	that	to	attract	a	man,	“Be
helpless!”	The	anima	represents	the	undeveloped	side	of	a	man,	where	he	is
unconsciously	helpless	and	at	loose	ends,	dark	and	equivocal.	He	is	attracted
by	that.	Similarly,	strong	women	will	be	attracted	often	to	weak	men,
sometimes	fatefully,	and	then	become	filled	with	fantasies	of	saving	them
from	alcoholism	or	some	other	decrepitude.	Again,	they	are	seeking	a	lost
part	of	themselves,	the	animus,	who	appears	as	an	inferior	male	in	projection.
Or,	if	she	is	a	weak	and	helpless	woman,	her	unconscious	may	compensate
with	images	of	male	competence,	and	she	will	find	herself	hopelessly
attracted	to	an	heroic	animus	projection	carrier.
Once	persons	get	together	and	spend	some	time	in	each	other’s	company,
the	ensuing	relationship	begins	showing	some	other	typical	anima-animus
characteristics.	In	an	intimate	relationship,	it	is	not	only	the	egos	of	the
partners	that	enter	into	the	mixture	of	psyches;	it	is	also	the	unconscious	parts,
and	importantly	the	
anima	and	animus.	They	have	been	there	all	along,
supplying	the	attractors	to	both	members	of	the	couple,	but	now	they	may
appear	surprisingly	different	from	what	they	looked	like	in	the	courtship	stage
of	the	relationship.	Here	is	Jung-the-psychological-realist	describing	the
situation:	“no	man	can	converse	with	an	animus	for	five	minutes	without

becoming	the	victim	of	his	own	anima.	Anyone	who	still	had	enough	sense	of
humour	to	listen	objectively	to	the	ensuing	dialogue	would	be	staggered	by
the	vast	number	of	commonplaces,	misapplied	truisms,	clichés	from
newspapers	and	novels,	shop-soiled	platitudes	of	every	description
interspersed	with	vulgar	abuse	and	brain-splitting	lack	of	logic.	It	is	a
dialogue	which,	irrespective	of	its	participants,	is	repeated	millions	and
millions	of	times	in	all	languages	of	the	world	and	always	remains	essentially
the	same.”
24
	On	the	male	side	the	anima	becomes	touchy,	overly	sensitive,
and	emotional;	on	the	female	side	the	animus	become	abusive,	power-ridden,
and	opinionated.	This	is	not	a	pretty	picture	and	surely	offers	a	stark	contrast
to	the	more	romantic	version	of	the	
mysterium	coniunctionis
	
(“mystical
union”)	of	song	and	story.	The	one	partner	becomes	possessed	by	the	animus
—an	undifferentiated	collection	of	opinions	motivated	by	a	power	drive—and
the	other	retreats	into	a	mood	that	is	undifferentiated	and	driven	by	the	need
for	love.	One	is	dogmatic,	the	other	becomes	withdrawn	or	emotional	and
starts	throwing	things	around.	It	is	a	typical	anima	versus	animus	cat-and-dog
fight.
If	the	emotionality	and	vituperation,	the	heat	and	fireworks,	of	this	conflict
dies	down	a	bit,	there	is	a	possibility	that	things	will	have	been	said	that	are
important	for	the	couple.	Once	the	egos	are	restored	to	their	normal	positions,
they	may	even	realize	that	some	transcendent	event	has	taken	place.	What
was	said	was	probably	not	very	personal.	It	was	more	general,	collective,
perhaps	even	archetypal	and	universal.	Perhaps	there	is	a	germ	of	wisdom
hidden	in	the	dark	mass	of	material	that	has	erupted	from	each	partner.
Perhaps	some	clarifications	and	insights	can	result	from	the	storm	that	has
now	passed.	This	would	be	the	work	of	consciousness,	rising	above	the	level
of	emotionality	and	arriving	at	insight	and	empathy.	At	the	very	least,	one	will
have	
had	a	glimpse	into	the	depths	of	oneself	and	of	the	other,	into	the
emotional	far	reaches	that	are	normally	hidden	behind	the	socialized	and
adapted	persona.
It	would	of	course	make	sense	to	look	at	Jung’s	own	life	to	amplify	further
the	meaning	the	anima	figure	held	for	him.	That	is	beyond	the	scope	of	this
study.	I	have	used	some	passages	from	his	autobiography,	and	biographical
works	are	in	print	and	others	are	underway	that	give	fuller	depictions	of	his
profound	relationships	with	women.	Jung	once	said	that	all	psychological
theory	is	also	personal	confession,	and	this	is	especially	true	of	these	areas
that	speak	of	the	inner	figures	and	personalities	of	the	psyche	such	as	the
shadow,	the	anima/us,	and	the	self.	These	concepts	and	abstract	theories	were
based	on	concrete	psychological	experiences,	much	of	it	interpersonal	and	not

only	solitary	and	private.	With	respect	to	the	anima,	she	was	for	Jung	both	a
living	inner	reality,	a	true	inner	figure	of	the	first	rank,	and	she	was	also
powerfully	experienced	by	him	in	projection	and	in	relationship.	Beginning
early	in	life	with	his	nursemaid	and	extending	through	his	romantic	courtship
and	marriage	to	Emma	Rauschenbach	and	his	deep	and	enduring	relationship
with	Toni	Wolff,	the	anima	was	a	constant	companion	in	Jung’s	inner	and
outer	life.	To	him,	she	seemed	to	be	the	guide	of	his	fate.	And	the	most
profound	experience	of	the	self,	a	concept	which	I	will	describe	in	the
following	chapter,	occurred	for	Jung	in	the	conjunction	between	man	and
woman,	when	the	anima	and	animus	were	the	guiding	figures	in	their	union.

7
The	Psyche’s	Transcendent	Center	and	Wholeness
(The	Self)
I	was	tempted	to	begin	this	book	with	a	chapter	on	the	self,	because	it	is	the
most	fundamental	feature	of	Jung’s	entire	vision.	It	is	the	key	to	his
psychological	theory,	and	in	some	respects	it	is	the	piece	that	most	sets	him
apart	from	all	other	figures	in	depth	psychology	and	psychoanalysis.	It	is
instructive	to	note	that	psychoanalytic	theory	has	moved	significantly	in
Jung’s	direction	over	the	past	half	century,	and	yet	few	if	any	other
psychoanalytic	theorists	have	ventured	as	far	as	his	conception	of	the	self	in
their	theorizing.	While	many	other	writers	today	use	the	term	self	in	their
clinical	studies	and	theoretical	statements,	none	has	in	mind	the	same	domain
that	Jung	was	trying	to	encompass	with	his	concept.	To	begin	with	Jung’s
theory	of	the	self	would	have	been	misleading,	however,	historically	and
conceptually.	It	is	not	only	the	most	fundamental	feature	of	his	theory,	it	is
also	the	capstone.	It	therefore	needs	preparation	in	order	to	grasp	its	full	range
and	importance.
For	Jung	the	self	is	transcendent,	which	means	that	it	is	not	defined	by	or
contained	within	the	psychic	realm	but	rather	lies	beyond	it	and,	in	an
important	sense,	defines	it.	It	is	this	point	about	the	self’s	transcendence	that
makes	Jung’s	theory	different	from	those	of	other	self-theorists	like	Kohut.
For	Jung,	the	self	is	paradoxically	not	oneself.	It	is	more	than	one’s
subjectivity,	and	its	essence	lies	beyond	the	subjective	realm.	The	self	forms
the	ground	for	the	subject’s	commonality	with	the	world,	with	the	structures
of	Being.	In	the	self,	subject	and	object,	ego	and	other	are	joined	in	a	common
field	of	structure	and	energy.	This	is	the	point	I	hope	will	become	most	salient
from	what	follows	in	this	chapter.
The	typical	English	usage	of	the	word	“self”	makes	it	difficult	to	appreciate

what	Jung	is	getting	at	in	his	theory.	As	used	in	everyday	parlance,	self	is
equivalent	to	ego.	When	we	say	that	someone	is	selfish,	we	mean	that	they
are	egotistical	or	narcissistic.	But	in	a	Jungian	vocabulary,	self	has	the
opposite	meaning.	To	say	that	someone	is	self-centered	is	to	say	that	they	are
precisely	not	egotistical	and	narcissistic,	but	rather	philosophical,	having	a
wide	perspective,	and	not	personally	reactive	or	easily	thrown	off	balance.
When	the	ego	is	well	connected	to	the	self,	a	person	stands	in	relationship
with	a	transcendent	center	and	is	precisely	not	narcissistically	invested	in
nearsighted	goals	and	short-term	gains.	In	such	persons	there	is	an	ego-free
quality,	as	though	they	were	consulting	a	deeper	and	wider	reality	than	merely
the	practical,	rational,	and	personal	considerations	typical	of	ego
consciousness.
Jung’s	Experience	of	the	Self
Before	entering	into	a	discussion	of	
Aion,
	the	central	text	of	Jung’s	self
theory,	I	think	it	will	be	useful	to	the	reader	to	have	an	impression	of	Jung’s
original	experiences	that	led	him	to	postulate	the	existence	of	the	self.	His
later	theorizing	sprang	from	his	experience.
Jung’s	own	account	of	his	first	major	experience	of	the	self	places	it	in	the
period	between	1916	and	1918.	During	this	difficult	time	in	his	life	he	made
the	major	discovery	that	at	bottom	
the	psyche	rests	on	a	fundamental	structure
and	that	this	structure	is	able	to	withstand	the	shocks	of	abandonment	and
betrayal	which	threaten	to	undo	a	person’s	mental	stability	and	emotional
balance.	This	was	the	discovery	of	a	deep,	largely	unconscious	pattern	of
psychological	unity	and	wholeness.
For	Jung	the	experience	of	the	self—that	most	impersonal	of	all	archetypes
—had	a	highly	dramatic	quality.	It	came	out	of	his	inner	struggles	and	turmoil
and	capped	a	period	of	his	life	that	often	had	him	wondering	if	he	was	losing
his	way	in	a	psychic	wilderness.	There	were	no	maps	for	him	to	consult	as	he
groped	through	a	jungle	of	tangled	emotions,	ideas,	memories,	and	images.	In
his	autobiography,	he	calls	this	the	period	of	“Confrontation	with	the
Unconscious.”
1
	At	the	time	of	his	momentous	discovery,	Jung	was	already
well-launched	into	his	midlife	crisis.	About	forty-one	years	old,	he	had
broken	with	Freud	some	five	years	earlier	and	had	after	that	suffered
emotional	disorientation	and	professional	uncertainty,	from	which	he	was
now	gradually	recovering.	He	refers	to	the	first	half	of	his	midlife	period

(1913-1916)	as	the	time	when	he	discovered	the	inner	world,	the	anima,	the
plurality	of	unconscious	images	and	fantasies.	Throughout	these	years	of
inner	exploration,	Jung	recorded	his	dreams,	fantasies,	and	other	important
experiences	in	an	elaborately	detailed	and	illustrated	document	which	has
come	to	be	called	the	“Red	Book.”	While	struggling	to	sort	out	the	images
and	emotions	that	had	burst	upon	him	from	the	unconscious,	he	had	also	been
trying	to	understand	how	they	fit	together	and	what	they	meant.	He	had	used
practices	such	as	yoga	breathing	to	maintain	his	emotional	equilibrium.	When
his	emotions	threatened	to	destroy	his	psychic	equilibrium	and	sanity,	he	used
meditation,	play	therapy,	active	imagination,	and	drawing	to	calm	down.	A
therapist	to	himself,	he	worked	out	techniques	(which	he	later	would	use	with
patients)	to	keep	his	own	ego-consciousness	stable	in	the	midst	of	this	flood
of	material	from	the	unconscious.
Now,	as	he	continued	to	observe,	listen,	and	record	his	inner	experiences,
his	openness	increased	to	the	archetypal	end	of	the	psychic	continuum	and	to
the	spirit	world	into	which	it	merges.	
After	spending	several	years	at	the
“anima	level,”	he	began	to	enter	into	a	territory	that	revealed	the	archetype	of
the	self,	the	most	fundamental	architect	of	psychic	wholeness	and	order.	This
discovery	of	the	self	is	recounted	in	his	autobiography	and	took	place	over	the
period	of	several	years.
First	there	was	the	peculiar	incident	of	the	ringing	door	bell.	Jung	tells	of
how	one	Sunday	afternoon	in	1916,	as	he	was	sitting	in	his	living	room	on
Seestrasse	in	Kusnacht,	he	sensed	a	heavy	emotional	atmosphere	in	the	house.
The	members	of	his	household	seemed	tense	and	irritable.	He	did	not
understand	why,	but	the	air	seemed	charged	with	the	presence	of	unseen
figures.	Suddenly	the	doorbell	rang.	He	went	to	answer	it,	but	no	one	was
there.	Yet	the	knocker	was	clearly	moving.	He	swears	he	saw	it	move.	By
itself!	When	the	maid	asked	who	had	rung	the	bell,	Jung	said	he	did	not	know
since	there	was	no	one	at	the	door.	It	rang	again.	This	time	the	maid	also	saw
the	knocker	move.	He	was	not	hallucinating.	And	then	Jung	heard	the
following	words	suggest	themselves:
The	dead	came	back	from	Jerusalem,	where	they	found	not	what	they
sought.	They	prayed	me	let	them	in	and	besought	my	word,	and	thus	I
began	my	teaching	…	
2
He	decided	to	write	these	words	down.	More	came:
Harken:	I	begin	with	nothingness.	Nothingness	is	the	same	as	fullness.
In	infinity	full	is	no	better	than	empty.	Nothingness	is	both	empty	and
full.	As	well	might	ye	say	anything	else	of	nothingness,	as	for	instance

white	is	it,	or	black,	or	again,	it	is	not,	or	it	is.	This	nothingness	or
fullness	we	name	the	PLEROMA.
3
Over	the	next	few	days	Jung	took	down,	as	if	by	dictation,	a	Gnostic	text
entitled	“Seven	Sermons	to	the	Dead.”	This	teaching,	delivered	in	the	words
and	under	the	identity	of	the	ancient	Gnostic	master,	Basilides,	is	a	message
that	came	to	Jung	from	the	archetypal	realm	of	the	psyche.
4
Of	course	one	knows	that	Jung	was	very	interested	in	Gnosticism	prior	to
this	visitation	and	that	he	had	read	many	fragments	of	ancient	Gnostic	texts,
so	there	were	undoubtedly	many	connections	to	this	visionary	experience	in
his	living	room	
and	library.	Yet	this	was	also	a	highly	imaginative	and
creative	new	work,	albeit	in	the	form	of	a	grandiose	religious	text,	and	it	came
spontaneously	from	the	depths	of	Jung’s	own	psyche.	He	was	not	simply
quoting	from	memory—even	cryptomnesia	does	not	account	for	it,	since	it
cannot	be	found	elsewhere	in	the	classic	texts	of	Gnosis.	Nor	was	he	trying
deliberately	to	write	in	the	style	of	the	Gnostics.	This	writing	was	not
intentional.	In	retrospect	it	can	be	seen	that	this	text,	which	was	completed	in
about	three	days,	contains	the	seeds	of	many	ideas	that	Jung	would	work	out
in	the	following	decades	in	more	rational	intellectual	and	scientific	terms.
This	was	one	of	many	unusual	psychic	experiences	during	these	years	of
confrontation	with	unconscious.	At	a	more	mundane	level,	Jung	carried	on
with	his	life	and	his	professional	practice.	This	period	coincided	almost
exactly	with	World	War	I,	during	which	Switzerland,	a	neutral	country,	was
isolated	from	Europe	and	the	wider	world.	Travel	was	impossible.	Like	all
Swiss	adult	men,	Jung	was	in	the	Army—he	was	a	medical	officer—and	he
was	assigned	the	role	of	commandant	at	the	prisoner	of	war	camp	in	Chateau
d’Oex	in	the	French-speaking	part	of	the	country.	It	must	have	been	a	more	or
less	tedious	administrative	job,	and	he	began	routinely	to	spend	some	time
each	morning	drawing	circles	and	elaborating	them	as	he	felt	inclined	to	do
so.	After	this	exercise	he	would	feel	refreshed	and	ready	for	the	day	ahead.
This	activity	centered	him,	he	says	in	his	autobiography.
5
Some	of	these	drawings	turned	into	very	elaborate	paintings.	Jung	later
compared	them	to	what	Tibetan	Buddhists	call	mandalas,	images	that
represent	the	cosmos,	the	spiritual	universe	of	the	Buddhist	practitioner.
(Some	twenty	years	later	on	his	trip	to	India	Jung	would	note	with	great
interest	how	people	paint	these	traditional	images	on	the	walls	of	their	homes
or	in	temples	in	order	to	stay	connected	to	cosmic	spiritual	powers	or	to	fend
off	evil	forces	and	influences.	Mandalas	have	both	a	protective	and	a
prayerful	function.)	Jung	came	to	realize	that	he	was	reproducing	a	universal

underlying	archetypal	pattern	that	has	to	do	with	putting	things	in	order.	This
experience	led	him	eventually	to	the	conclusion	that	if	a	spontaneously
unfolding	psychic	process	is	
followed	to	its	own	logical	end	and	is	permitted
to	express	itself	fully,	the	goal	of	this	process	will	be	fulfilled,	namely	to
manifest	universal	images	of	order	and	a	unity.	The	mandala	is	a	universal
symbol	that	expresses	the	intuition	of	ordered	wholeness.	To	name	the
archetypal	factor	that	is	operative	in	the	psyche	producing	this	goal	and	this
pattern,	Jung	chose	the	term	self,	following	the	Indian	Upanishads	in	their
designation	of	the	higher	personality,	the	
atman.
	This	experience	of	drawing
and	elaborating	mandalas	would	stay	with	Jung	as	the	central	experience	of
the	self:	emerging	slowly,	experientially,	spontaneously	into	consciousness.
Finally,	Jung	recorded	a	dream	in	1928	that	represented	for	him	the
completion	of	his	realization	of	the	self.	(Although	the	intensity	of	his	midlife
crisis	was	over	by	1920,	the	lingering	after-math	continued	until	1928	when
Jung	was	fifty-two	years	old.)	Throughout	his	forties	Jung	lived	in	a	kind	of
psychological	liminality,	or	limbo,	at	first	intensely	and	deeply	and	then	less
so.	At	the	end	he	had	a	dream	in	which	he	found	himself	in	the	English	city	of
Liverpool.	He	was	walking	through	the	streets	with	a	group	of	Swiss	friends
on	a	rainy	night,	and	soon	they	came	upon	an	intersection	that	was	shaped
like	a	wheel.	Several	streets	radiated	from	this	hub,	and	in	the	middle	of	the
intersection	there	was	a	square.	While	everything	was	dark	in	the	surrounding
area,	this	center	island	was	brightly	lit.	On	it	there	grew	a	single	tree,	a
Magnolia	full	of	reddish	blossoms.	His	companions	did	not	seem	able	to	see
the	beautiful	tree,	but	Jung	was	overcome	with	the	beauty	of	it.	Later	he
interpreted	this	dream	to	mean	that	he	had	been	given	a	vision	of	the	center,
the	self,	an	image	of	unearthly	beauty	that	is	located	in	the	“pool	of	life”
(Liverpool).	From	this	dream	experience,	he	writes,	“emerged	a	first	inkling
of	my	personal	myth.”
6
	In	this	key	passage,	Jung	declares	the	self	to	be	the
center	of	his	personal	myth.	He	later	conceived	of	it	as	the	prime	archetype
(the	One)	from	which	all	the	other	archetypes	and	archetypal	images
ultimately	derive.	The	self	is	the	magnetic	center	of	Jung’s	psychological
universe.	Its	presence	pulls	the	ego’s	compass	needle	to	true	north.
Jung’s	Definition	of	the	Self
Turning	now	from	Jung’s	own	personal	experience	of	the	self	to	his	theory,	a
few	remarks	will	pave	the	way	for	the	discussion	of	the	key	text	on	this

subject,	
Aion
.	Jung’s	writings	on	the	self	are	scattered	throughout	his
Collected	Works
	in	the	volumes	and	essays	that	were	published	after	1925
(the	year	of	Jung’s	50th	birthday),	and	of	these	the	most	focused	on	this
subject	is	
Aion.
	
This	work	was	published	in	1951	and	is,	according	to	the
editors	of	the	volume,	“a	long	monograph	on	the	archetype	of	the	self.”	Its
subtitle,	“Researches	into	the	Phenomenology	of	the	Self,”	makes	the	same
point.	The	book’s	title	is	taken	from	the	ancient	religion	of	Mithraism,	where
Aion	is	the	name	of	a	god	who	rules	over	the	astrological	calender	and	thus
over	time	itself.	The	title	therefore	suggests	a	factor	that	transcends	the
time/space	continuum	that	governs	ego-consciousness.
The	first	four	chapters	of	
Aion
	function	as	a	brief	general	introduction	to
Jung’s	psychology,	covering	the	concepts	of	ego,	shadow,	and	animus/anima,
and	a	first	pass	at	the	theory	of	the	self.	From	there	he	enters	into	discussions
of	many	symbolic	representations	of	the	self,	primarily	in	the	Biblical
traditions	and	the	relevant	“heresies”	such	as	Gnosticism	and	alchemy.	The
work	concludes	with	a	grand	theoretical	summation	in	the	final	chapter
entitled	“The	Structure	and	Dynamics	of	the	Self.”	Jung’s	argument,	often
difficult	to	follow	as	he	threads	his	way	through	astrology,	Gnosticism,
alchemy,	theology,	and	various	traditional	symbol	systems,	claims	that	this
transcendent	factor	of	the	psyche—which	we	now	call	the	self—has	been
studied	and	experienced	by	many	people	in	earlier	times,	and	their	accounts
of	it	in	symbolic	terms	can	be	useful	for	grasping	its	nature	and	energy.
The	introductory	chapter	on	the	self	begins	as	follows:	“the	self	…	is
completely	outside	the	personal	sphere,	and	appears,	if	at	all,	only	as	a
religious	mythologem,	and	its	symbols	range	from	the	highest	to	the	lowest
…	anyone	who	wants	to	achieve	the	difficult	feat	of	realizing	something	not
only	intellectually,	but	also	according	to	its	feeling-value,	must	for	better	or
worse	come	to	grips	with	the	anima/animus	problem	in	order	to	open	the	way
for	
a	high	union,	a	
coniunctio	oppositorum.
	This	is	an	indispensable
prerequisite	for	wholeness.”
7
	At	this	point	in	the	text,	Jung	introduces
“wholeness,”	a	term	that	is	equivalent	to	the	self.	Wholeness	results,
practically	speaking,	when	the	self	is	realized	in	consciousness.	In	fact,	this	is
not	completely	achievable,	since	the	polarities	and	opposites	resident	in	the
self	are	forever	generating	more	and	new	material	to	integrate.	Nevertheless,
practicing	wholeness	on	a	regular	basis	is	the	way	of	the	self,	Jung’s	version
of	living	in	Tao.	“Although	‘wholeness’	seems	at	first	sight	to	be	nothing	but
an	abstract	idea	(like	anima	and	animus),	it	is	nevertheless	empirical	in	so	far
as	it	is	anticipated	by	the	psyche	in	the	form	of	spontaneous	or	autonomous
symbols.	These	are	the	quaternity	or	mandala	symbols,	which	occur	not	only

in	the	dreams	of	modern	people	who	have	never	heard	of	them,	but	are	widely
disseminated	in	the	historical	records	of	many	peoples	and	many	epochs.”
8
Symbols	of	the	self	determine	the	focus	of	
Aion
.	As	Jung	sees	it,	they	are
ubiquitous	and	autochthonic	(that	is,	innate	and	spontaneous),	and	they	are
delivered	to	the	psyche	through	the	archetypal	psychoid	region	from	the
archetype	per	se.	The	self,	a	transcendent	nonpsychological	entity,	acts	on	the
psychic	system	to	produce	symbols	of	wholeness,	often	as	quaternity	or
mandala	images	(squares	and	circles).	“Their	significance	as	symbols	of	unity
and	totality	is	amply	confirmed	by	history	as	well	as	by	empirical	psychology.
What	at	first	looks	like	an	abstract	idea	stands	in	reality	for	something	that
exists	and	can	be	experienced,	that	demonstrates	its	a	priori	presence
spontaneously.	Wholeness	is	thus	an	objective	factor	that	confronts	the
subject	independently	of	him.”
9
In	this	passage,	Jung	goes	on	to	describe	a	hierarchy	of	agencies	within	the
psyche.	As	the	anima	or	animus	has	“a	higher	position	in	the	hierarchy	than
the	shadow,	so	wholeness	lays	claim	to	a	position	and	a	value	superior	to
those	of	the	syzygy.”
10
	At	the	most	immediate	level	is	the	shadow,	and	over
this	the	anima/animus—the	syzygy—stands	as	a	superior	authority	and
power.	Presiding	over	the	entire	psychic	government	is	the	self,	the	ultimate
authority	and	highest	value:	“unity	and	totality	stand	at	the	highest	point	on
the	scale	of	objective	values	because	their	
symbols	can	no	longer	be
distinguished	from	the	
imago	Dei.”
11
	
Jung	contends	that	every	one	of	us
bears	the	God-image—the	stamp	of	the	self—within	ourselves.	We	carry	the
mark	of	the	archetype:	typos	means	a	stamp	impressed	on	a	coin,	and	
arche
means	the	original	or	master	copy.	Each	human	individual	bears	an
impression	of	the	archetype	of	the	self.	This	is	innate	and	given.
Since	each	of	us	is	stamped	with	the	
imago	Dei
	by	virtue	of	being	human,
we	are	also	in	touch	with	“unity	and	totality	[which]	stand	at	the	highest	point
on	the	scale	of	objective	values.”	When	needed,	this	intuitive	knowledge	can
come	to	our	assistance:	“experience	shows	that	individual	mandalas	are
symbols	of	order,	and	that	they	occur	in	patients	principally	during	times	of
psychic	disorientation	or	re-orientation.”
12
	When	people	spontaneously	draw
or	dream	about	mandalas,	this	suggests	to	the	therapist	that	there	is	a
psychological	crisis	in	consciousness.	The	appearance	of	self	symbols	means
that	the	psyche	needs	to	be	unified.	This	was	Jung’s	own	experience.	During
his	most	disoriented	time,	he	spontaneously	began	drawing	mandalas.
Compensatory	symbols	of	wholeness	are	generated	by	the	self	when	the
psychic	system	is	in	danger	of	fragmenting.	This	is	the	point	at	which	the

archetype	of	the	self	intervenes	in	an	effort	to	unify	it.
The	emergence	of	unity	symbols	and	of	integrative	movements	in	the
psychic	system	generally	are	marks	of	the	action	of	the	self	archetype.	The
self’s	task	seems	to	be	to	hold	the	psychic	system	together	and	to	keep	it	in
balance.	Its	goal	is	unity.	This	unity	is	not	static	but	dynamic,	as	we	shall	see
in	the	next	chapter	on	individuation.	The	psychic	system	is	unified	by
becoming	more	balanced,	interrelated,	and	integrated.	The	self’s	influence	on
the	psyche	as	a	whole	is	mirrored	by	the	influence	of	the	ego	upon
consciousness.	Like	the	self,	the	ego	too	has	a	centering,	ordering,	unifying
function,	and	its	goal	is	to	balance	and	integrate	functions	insofar	as	this	is
possible,	given	the	existence	of	the	complexes	and	defenses.	In	chapter	1,	I
discussed	the	ego	as	the	center	of	consciousness	and	the	locus	of	will.	It	has
the	ability	to	say	“I”	and	“I	am,”	or	“I	think”	or	“I	will.”	At	another	stage,	it
becomes	a	self-conscious	psychic	entity	and	able	to	say	not	only	“I	am”	but	“I
know	that	I	am.”	It	may	be	the	case,	although	one	cannot	be	
certain,	that	the
self	also	knows	that	it	is.	Does	the	archetype	possess	self-awareness?	Does	it
know	that	it	is?	Jung	discovered	what	he	thought	to	be	a	kind	of
consciousness	in	the	archetypes.	When	archetypal	images	invade	the	ego,	for
example,	and	take	possession	of	it,	they	have	a	voice,	an	identity,	a	point	of
view,	a	set	of	values.	But	is	there	self-awareness	within	the	archetypal	unit
itself?	One	myth	strongly	points	to	such	awareness.	When	Moses	confronted
God	at	the	burning	bush	and	asked,	“Who	are	you?”	the	archetypal	voice
replied,	“I	am	that	I	am.”	Whatever	this	may	mean	theologically,	it	seems	to
demonstrate	self-reflexive	consciousness	in	the	archetype.
Jung	believed	that	a	privileged	relation	exists	between	the	ego	and	the	self.
It	may	be	that	the	self	has	the	highest	form	of	self-awareness	and	shares	this
with	the	ego,	which	in	turns	shows	this	property	most	strongly	within	the
more	familiar	regions	of	the	psychic	world.	Because	of	this	intimate
connection	between	ego	and	self,	it	might	be	argued	that	the	self	is	in	fact	an
image	of	the	ego,	a	kind	of	super-ego	or	ideal	of	the	ego.	Jung,	however,
wanted	to	insist	that	he	had	discovered	something	psychoid—psyche—like
but	not	strictly	only	psychic—that	exists	in	a	realm	beyond	the	psyche	itself,
something	that	affects	the	psychic	system	through	its	images,	mental	contents,
and	mythological	ideas,	and	through	revelatory	experiences	such	as	that	of
Moses	at	the	burning	bush	or	receiving	the	Law	on	Mount	Sinai,	but	is	not	a
product	of	the	ego	or	of	social	constructions.

Symbols	of	the	Self
Although	the	entire	book	is	about	the	self,	
Aion
	has	two	chapters	specifically
on	this	subject.	The	first	of	these,	chapter	4,	which	we	have	just	considered,	is
introductory.	The	book’s	final	chapter,	on	the	other	hand,	is	perhaps	Jung’s
most	sophisticated	and	complete	statement	on	the	self.	It	assumes	the
intervening	discussion	of	symbols	from	Gnosticism,	astrology,	and	alchemy,
which	have	threaded	through	manifestations	of	culture	in	the	West	over	the
past	two	millennia.
This	chapter	begins	by	referring	to	the	self	as	the	archetype	underlying	ego-
consciousness.	Ego-consciousness	is	the	point	of	
individual	will,	awareness,
and	self-assertion.	Its	function	is	to	look	out	for	the	individual	and	to	keep
him	or	her	alive.	The	ego—as	I	described	in	chapter	1—is	a	complex	that	is
organized	around	a	dual	center,	a	trauma	and	an	archetype	(the	self).	To	talk
about	the	self,	Jung	now	lists	a	host	of	possible	images	for	it.
13
	Some	of	them
are	images	that	manifest	in	dreams	or	fantasies,	and	others	appear	in
relationships	and	interactions	with	the	world.	Geometrical	structures,	such	as
the	circle,	the	square,	and	the	star,	are	ubiquitous	and	frequent.	These	may
appear	in	dreams	without	drawing	special	attention	to	themselves:	people
sitting	around	a	round	table,	four	objects	arranged	in	a	square	space,	a	city
plan,	a	home.	Numbers,	particularly	the	number	four	and	multiples	of	four,
indicate	quaternity	structures.	(Jung	was	not	so	fond	of	the	number	three,
which	he	regards	as	only	a	partial	expression	of	the	self:	three	“should	be
understood	as	a	defective	quaternity	or	as	a	stepping	stone	towards	it.”
14
	He	is
more	positive	about	threes	and	trinities	in	other	passages,	but	mainly	he	views
them	as	only	a	theoretical	approximation	to	wholeness	that	leaves	out	the
concreteness	and	groundedness	which	wholeness	requires.)
Other	self	images	are	gemstones,	like	diamonds	and	sapphires,	stones	that
represent	high	and	rare	value.	Yet	further	self	representations	include	castles,
churches,	vessels	and	containers,	and	of	course	the	wheel,	which	has	a	center
and	spokes	radiating	outward	ending	in	a	circular	rim.	Human	figures	that	are
superior	to	the	ego	personality,	such	as	parents,	uncles,	kings,	queens,	princes
and	princesses,	are	also	possible	self	representations.	There	are	also	animal
images	that	symbolize	the	self:	the	elephant,	the	horse,	the	bull,	the	bear,	the
fish,	and	the	snake.	These	are	totem	animals	that	represent	one’s	clan	or
people.	The	collective	is	greater	than	the	ego	personality.
The	self	may	also	be	represented	by	organic	images,	such	as	trees	and

flowers,	and	by	inorganic	images	such	as	mountains	and	lakes.	Jung	also
mentions	the	phallus	as	a	self	symbol.	“Where	there	is	an	undervaluation	of
sexuality	the	self	is	symbolized	as	a	phallus.	Undervaluation	can	consist	in	an
ordinary	repression	or	in	overt	devaluation.	In	certain	differentiated	persons	a
purely	biological	interpretation	and	evaluation	of	sexuality	can	also	have	this
effect.”
15
	Jung	blames	Freud’s	excessively	rationalistic	
attitude	for	his
overemphasis	on	sexuality.	This	led	Jung	to	adopt	a	mystical	attitude	toward
this	instinct.
The	self	contains	opposites	and	“has	a	paradoxical,	antinomial	[amoral]
character.	It	is	male	and	female,	old	man	and	child,	powerful	and	helpless,
large	and	small.	[He	might	also	have	added,	good	and	evil.]	It	is	quite
possible	that	the	seeming	paradox	is	nothing	but	a	reflection	of	the
enantiodromian	changes	of	the	conscious	attitude	which	can	have	a
favourable	or	an	unfavourable	effect	on	the	whole.”
16
	In	other	words,	the
form	in	which	the	self	is	represented	is	influenced	by	the	conscious	attitude	of
the	person	regarding	it.	Changes	in	the	conscious	attitude	could	bring	about
shifts	in	the	features	of	the	self	symbol.
As	he	moves	toward	his	summary	statement,	Jung	begins	to	draw	diagrams
of	the	self	by	which	he	hopes	to	clarify	his	vision.	The	diagrams	in	paragraphs
390	and	391	of	
Aion
	are	attempts	to	summarize	a	vast	amount	of	material.	It
is	somewhat	unusual	for	Jung	to	diagram	his	thought,	but	he	is	reaching	for	a
level	of	complexity	and	intelligibility	that	may	be	beyond	human	grasp.	The
first	diagram	shows	what	might	be	called	a	cross-sectional	view	of	levels	in
the	self.


Each	level	is	built	of	a	quaternity,	and	each	of	them	represents	complexity
and	wholeness	at	that	level.	The	image	of	the	four	quaternities,	which	are
stacked	in	an	order	that	ascends	from	material	to	spiritual	poles	on	a
continuum,	expresses	totality	and	wholeness.
What	appear	as	quaternities	from	one	viewpoint	are,	from	another	angle,
three-dimensional	six-pointed	figures	attached	to	each	other	end	to	end.
A.	The	Anthropos	Quaternio
B.	The	Shadow	Quaternio
Each	of	these	three-dimensional	double	pyramids	shares	a	common	point
with	the	one	above	and	below	itself.	As	arranged	in	a	stack	of	four,	there	is	a
line	that	divides	them	in	half—the	Christus—Diabolos	line—above	which	are
the	Homo	and	Anthropos	quaternities	and	below	which	fall	the	Lapis	and
Rotundum	quaternities.	The	circle	at	the	Homo	position	locates	the	position
of	ego-consciousness.	Directly	above	it	rises	the	Anthropos	quaternity,	an
expression	of	ideal	wholeness	at	the	spiritual	level.	This	is	symbolized	by	the
Gnostic	Anthropos	or	Higher	Adam,	an	ideal	figure.	Jung	states	that	the
present	historical	age,	consisting	of	the	last	two	thousand	years,	began	with	an

emphasis	on	this	spiritual	quaternity.	Man	was	regarded	as	a	spiritual	being	in
the	image	of	Christian	ideal	spiritual	image	projected	onto	a	historical	figure,
Jesus	of	Nazareth.	The	metamorphosis	of	Jesus	into	the	Christ	was	the	result
of	people	projecting	onto	this	figure	their	own	spiritual	higher	(Anthropos)
selves.
Below	the	Homo	circle	(ego-consciousness)	lies	a	quaternity	that	represents
the	shadow	of	the	one	above	it.	It	rests	on	the	circle	of	the	Serpent.	This
“lower	self”	mirrors	the	“higher	self”	above	it,	but	darkly.	Shadow	figures
occupy	each	of	the	four	points	of	the	quaternity	(the	lower	Jethro	versus	the
higher	Jethro,	etc.).	Jung	calls	this	the	Shadow	quaternity.	It	corresponds	point
for	point	to	the	Anthropos	quaternity	above	it	and	represents	a	less	idealized
expression	of	the	same	wholeness.	From	the	Shadow	the	trajectory	continues
downward:	from	spirit	to	instinct	and	on	down	into	matter	itself.	The	Serpent
point	signifies	the	base	of	the	Shadow	and	connects	it	to	the	material	world.
The	shadow	is	the	inferior	personality,	the	lowest	levels	of	which	are
indistinguishable	from	the	instinctuality	of	animals.	This	connects	our	ideal
spiritual	wholeness	to	our	biological	animal	nature.	A	person	who	is	not
connected	in	consciousness	to	this	quaternity	lives	in	the	head,	in	a	realm	of
intellectual	and	spiritual	ideals	that	has	little	relation	to	everyday	life	or	to	the
biological	stratum	of	existence.	A	person	identified	with	and	living	primarily
out	of	the	Shadow	quaternity,	on	the	other	hand,	is	more	or	less	limited	to
consciousness	at	the	level	of	animal	existence:	the	survival	of	the	individual
(nourishment)	and	of	the	species	(sexuality),	a	state	of	spiritual	and	moral
underdevelopment.
The	serpent	symbolizes	the	self	in	its	strongest	and	most	blatant
paradoxicality.	On	the	one	hand,	it	represents	everything	that	is	“snaky”	in
human	nature:	cold-blooded	instincts	of	survival,	territoriality,	base
physicality.	On	the	other	hand,	it	symbolizes	the	wisdom	of	the	body	and	the
instincts—somatic	awareness,	gut	intuitions	and	instinctual	knowledge.	The
serpent	has	traditionally	been	a	paradoxical	symbol,	referring	both	to	wisdom
and	to	evil	(or	the	temptation	to	do	evil).	The	serpent	therefore	symbolizes	the
most	extreme	tension	of	opposites	within	the	self.

C.	The	Paradise	Quaternio
Continuing	downward,	the	Paradise	Quaternio	represents	a	descent	into	the
level	of	organic	material	processes.	Human	beings	share	this	level	not	only
with	animals	but	with	plants.	This	refers	to	the	physical	fact	that	organic	life
is	organized	around	the	nature	of	the	carbon	atom	and	its	properties.	Organic
chemistry	is	the	scientific	discipline	that	studies	this	level	of	human	existence
systematically.	And	below	that	lies	the	Lapis	quaternity,	which	is	the	absolute
physical	base	of	being.	At	this	level,	the	chemical	elements	and	atomic
particles	must	forge	some	kind	of	unity	and	organization,	interacting	in	such	a
way	as	to	produce	a	stable	creature	that	can	maintain	physical	equilibrium
sufficient	for	life	at	the	organic	and	psychic	and	spiritual	levels.
D.	Lapis	Quaternio
This	level,	which	underlies	the	psyche	and	the	organic	body,	passes	into	the
inorganic	realm,	indeed	all	the	way	down	to	the	molecular	level.	By	the	time
the	structure	of	the	self	arrives	at	the	level	of	the	rotundum,	it	has	reached	the
level	of	pure	energy	itself,	which	passes	through	the	atomic	level	into	and
past	the	subatomic	level.	The	rotundum,	Jung	says,	is	an	abstract

transcendental	idea:	the	idea	of	energy.
The	psyche	proper	is	left	behind	at	the	Christus-Diabolus	line,	that	is	at	the
Serpent	Quaternio.	That	line	is	equivalent	to	the	psychoid	boundary	where
psyche	merges	into	matter.	Although	the	serpent	is	somewhat	psychic,	or
quasi-psychic,	being	cold-blooded	it	represents	an	energy	that	is	also	very
distant	from	ego-consciousness	and	from	the	personal	will.	It	shows
movement	and	a	type	of	consciousness,	but	one	very	far	from	human	ego-
consciousness.	The	serpent	represents	the	autonomic	nervous	system.	There	is
wisdom	in	the	body,	but	its	consciousness	consists	only	of	flickers	of
awareness	that	might	be	read	and	interpreted	by	the	ego.	On	the	other	hand,
the	body	may	well	be	responsible	for	some	dreams.	The	serpent’s	ambiguity
as	a	symbol	derives	either	from	the	ego’s	ambivalence	towards	it—because
we	are	attached	to	the	higher	anthropos	level,	to	our	ideals,	and	therefore	in
conflict	with	our	body’s	instincts—or	from	its	capacity	to	arouse	the	fear	of
losing	contact	with	the	higher	levels	of	consciousness,	
which	would	be
destructive.	The	serpent	level	is	a	consciousness-creator,	and	in	this	it
represents	the	psychization	process.
Penetrating	through	the	inorganic	level	leads	to	the	realm	of	pure	energy,
which	modern	physics	has	also	discovered.	This	comes	about	by	continuing
to	move	ever	further	into	matter	until	one	finally	arrives	at	a	point	that
dissolves	into	pure	energy.	But	energy	is	so	intangible.	In	fact,	it	is	an	idea,	an
abstraction,	a	concept	used	to	describe	something	that	cannot	be	observed
directly,	though	it	can	be	measured	by	its	effects.	Psychic	energy,	as	we	saw
in	chapter	3,	is	for	Jung	the	lifeforce,	the	vitality	we	bring	to	our	projects,	the
interest	we	take	in	life	and	in	others.	It	is	a	power	to	reckon	with,	as	anyone
who	has	ever	suffered	from	its	absence	in	a	clinical	depression	knows	only	to
well.	It	can	move	mountains,	but	it	is	nebulous	and	unfathomable,	too.	So	the
descent	through	the	layers	of	psyche	from	the	highest	levels	of	idea	and	ideal
and	image	through	the	concreteness	of	the	ego’s	existence	and	the	body’s
reality	into	the	chemical	and	molecular	composition	of	our	physical	being
leads	finally	to	pure	energy	and	back	into	the	realm	of	ideas,	which	is	the
world	of	
nous,
	of	mind,	of	spirit.	Thus	the	quaternities	touch	at	the	poles	of
their	greatest	opposition,	at	the	extremes	of	spirit	and	matter.	Jung	drew	this
as	dynamic	circulation:

The	arrows	move	in	a	circle,	and	eventually	Anthropos	and	Rotundum	come
together	again	at	the	top.
The	Self	as	Central	Mystery	of	the	Psyche
It	is	obvious	from	Jung’s	writings	that	unity	and	totality	were	his	highest
values	and	that	the	self	formed	his	personal	myth.	But	it	is	a	myth	that	he
attempted	to	ground	in	evidence	and	theory.	More	correctly,	the	theory	of	the
self—the	concept	that	there	is	a	transcendent	center	that	governs	the	psyche
from	outside	of	itself	and	circumscribes	its	entirety—was	a	means	that	Jung
used	to	account	for	basic	psychological	phenomena	such	as	the	spontaneous
appearance	of	circles	or	mandalas,	the	self-regulating	functioning	of	the
psyche	in	what	he	called	“compensation,”	the	progressive	development	of
consciousness	through	the	life	span	in	what	he	called	“individuation,”	and	the
existence	of	numerous	polarities	evident	in	psychological	life	that	form
coherent	structures	and	generate	energy.	Jung	has	been	criticized	by	some
conservative	theologians	for	transforming	the	self	into	a	God-concept	and
then	worshipping	at	the	shrine	which	he	himself	created.	He	would	likely
counter	such	an	accusation	by	arguing	that,	as	an	empirical	scientist,	he	was
simply	observing	facts	and	trying	to	account	for	their	existence	and	for	their
relation	to	one	another.	To	him	the	concept	of	the	self	offered	the	best
explanation	he	could	provide	for	one	of	the	central	mysteries	of	the	psyche—
its	seemingly	miraculous	creativity,	its	centering	dynamics,	and	its	deep
structures	of	order	and	coherence.
The	psychic	system	as	a	whole	consists	of	many	parts.	Thoughts	and

archetypal	images	stand	at	one	end	of	the	spectrum,	representations	of	the
drives	and	instincts	at	the	other	end,	and	in	between	are	a	vast	amount	of
personal	material	such	as	memories	forgotten	and	recalled	and	all	the
complexes.	The	factor	that	orders	this	whole	system	and	ties	it	all	together	is
an	invisible	agent	called	the	self.	This	is	what	creates	the	balances	among	the
various	other	factors	and	ties	them	together	into	one	functioning	unit.	The	self
is	the	center,	and	it	unifies	the	pieces.	But	it	
does	so	at	a	considerable
distance,	like	the	sun	influencing	the	orbits	of	the	planets.	Its	essence	lies
beyond	the	boundaries	of	the	psyche.	It	is	psychoid,	and	it	extends	into
regions	beyond	human	experience	and	knowing.	In	that	sense,	Jung	would	say
the	self	is	infinite.	At	least	we	cannot	say	from	empirical	evidence	where	its
edges	may	lie.	This	is	as	far	as	Jung	would	go,	as	he	notes	in	his
autobiography,	but	it	is	surely	a	good	distance.

8
Emergence	of	the	Self
(Individuation)
The	features	of	Jung’s	map	of	the	soul	are	now	in	place,	and	with	that	in	the
foreground	one	is	now	prepared	to	consider	the	psychological	journey	taken
in	this	territory	over	the	course	of	a	person’s	lifetime.	I	have	touched	on	this
theme	of	psychological	development	many	times	already,	but	now	with	the
whole	theory	in	mind	it	is	possible	to	convey	the	full	range	of	what	Jung
called	the	
individuation	process.
	People	develop	in	many	ways	throughout
their	lifetimes,	and	they	undergo	multiple	changes	at	many	levels.	The	total
experience	of	wholeness	over	an	entire	lifetime—the	emergence	of	the	self	in
psychological	structure	and	in	consciousness—is	conceptualized	by	Jung	and
called	individuation.
Jung’s	concept	of	individuation	is	based	partially	on	the	common
observation	that	people	do	grow	and	develop	in	the	course	of	the	seventy	or
eighty	years	they	normally	live	now	in	Western	societies.	
Physically,
	people
are	born	as	infants,	pass	after	several	years	into	childhood,	then	enter
adolescence	and	early	adulthood.	The	apex	of	physical	development	generally
occurs	in	the	period	of	late	adolescence	and	early	adulthood,	and	physical
growth	is	more	or	less	completely	achieved	by	the	age	of	twenty.	The	healthy
body	is	now	vibrant	and	fully	capable	of	biological	reproduction	and	the
heroic	feats	of	effort	and	endurance	required	for	coping	with	the	physical
world.	Physically	one	is	complete	at	this	point,	although	muscles	can	be	built
up	further	and	athletic	skills	sharpened	and	honed.	After	the	mid-thirties,	the
decline	and	decay	of	bodily	function	becomes	an	increasingly	important
factor.	One	has	to	conserve	and	protect	one’s	body	and	become	careful	about
stressing	it	too	much	lest	it	be	damaged	beyond	repair.	As	midlife	and	middle
age	set	in,	the	physical	changes	and	developments	that	occur	are	often
unwelcome	and	may	cause	considerable	anxiety.	Wrinkles,	sagging	stomachs

and	breasts,	aches	and	pains	in	the	joints—all	of	these	are	daily	reminders	of
mortality.	Adulthood	and	middle	age	are	inevitably	followed	by	old	age,
which	can	last	a	long	time	or	only	a	short	while.	It	is	considered	to	begin	in
the	seventies.	In	the	next	century	it	will	no	doubt	become	commonplace	for
people	to	live	to	a	hundred	or	even	to	a	hundred	and	twenty.	Physical	decline
accelerates	during	this	late	period.	The	physical	body	grows,	matures,	ages,
and	declines	in	the	course	of	the	full	lifespan.	Physical	growth	and	decay	are
governed	importantly	by	genetic	programs,	which	in	Jung’s	theory	of	the
psyche	are	interfaced	with	archetypal	patterns.	Each	stage	of	life	is
undergirded	and	supported	by	a	set	of	archetypal	images	that	shape
psychological	attitudes,	behavior,	and	motivations.	The	infant,	for	example,
enters	the	world	prepared	to	play	its	role	in	constellating	suitable	mothering
attitudes	and	behaviors	in	its	caretaker	by	cooing,	smiling,	sucking,	and
generally	making	itself	lovable.	At	the	same	time	(if	all	goes	well)	the	mother
is	prepared	to	assume	the	role	of	nurturing	and	feeding	her	infant.	The
mother-infant	pair	describe	an	archetypal	pattern	of	human	fantasy	and
interpersonal	interaction	that	is	primordial	and	has	important	survival	value.
For	each	stage	of	life	there	are	such	constellations	of	instinct	and	archetype,
which	result	in	patterns	of	behavior	and	feeling	and	mentation.
The	Psychological	Lifespan
Jung	was	the	first	of	what	have	come	to	be	called	
psychological
	
lifespan
theorists.	As	opposed	to	those	who	suppose	that	the	most	
important	features
of	psychological	and	character	development	occur	in	infancy	and	early
childhood	and	nothing	of	major	import	follows	after	that,	Jung	saw
development	as	ongoing	and	the	opportunities	for	further	psychological
development	as	an	option	for	people	at	any	age,	including	middle	and	old	age.
This	is	not	to	say	that	he	minimized	early	development,	and	certainly	he	paid
great	attention	to	inherited	features	and	tendencies	of	the	personality,	but	the
full	expression	and	manifestation	of	the	personality	takes	an	entire	lifetime	to
unfold.	The	self	emerges	bit	by	bit	through	the	many	stages	of	development
described	by	Jung	and	other	theorists	such	as	Erik	Erikson.
For	Jung,	psychological	development	follows	the	path	of	physical
development	to	a	point.	It	can	be	divided	into	the	first	half	of	life	and	the
second.	In	a	short	but	seminal	article	called	“The	Stages	of	Life,”	he	describes
this	developmental	trajectory	by	using	the	image	of	the	sun	rising	in	the

morning,	reaching	its	apex	at	noon,	and	descending	in	the	afternoon	to	set
finally	in	the	evening.
1
	This	corresponds	more	or	less	to	the	pattern	of	the
physical,	but	Jung	adds	that	there	are	important	differences,	particularly	with
respect	to	the	second	half	of	life.	In	the	beginning,	consciousness	arises	like
the	dawn	as	the	infant	ego	emerges	from	the	waters	of	unconsciousness,	and
its	growth	and	expansion	and	increasing	complexity	and	power	coincide	with
the	growth	and	development	of	physical	body	that	houses	it.	As	the	body
grows	and	the	brain	matures	and	learning	capacities	develop	and	expand,	the
ego	also	develops	its	strength	and	capacities.	A	first	step	is	to	distinguish	the
individual	body	from	objects	in	the	surrounding	world.	This	runs	parallel	to
separating	from	the	unconscious	matrix	within.	The	world	becomes	more	real
and	concrete	and	is	no	longer	simply	the	recipient	of	gross	projections.
Distinctions	begin	to	be	made	and	observed.	Persons	begin	to	move	rapidly
toward	a	capacity	to	function	as	separate	entities.	They	begin	to	act	as
individuals,	with	the	ability	to	control	themselves	and	their	environments	to	a
reasonable	degree,	and	to	contain	affect	and	the	flow	of	thought	as	required
by	social	standards	of	behavior.	The	ego	learns,	quite	naturally	and
spontaneously,	to	manipulate	the	environment	for	individual	survival	
in	the
ambient	culture	and	to	achieve	personal	benefits.	It	develops	a	persona.	The
healthy	child’s	and	young	person’s	ego	busily	learns	to	set	up	its	own	world
by	becoming	self-reliant	and	self-supporting	in	the	terms	offered	by
circumstance	of	birth.	Adaptation,	which	is	based	on	archetypal	images	such
as	the	mother-infant	unit	and	the	later	hero	pattern	of	separation	and	conquest,
takes	place	in	relation	to	whatever	the	circumstances	may	be.	Eventually,	if
all	goes	well,	people	are	able	to	free	themselves	from	dependency	on	their
families	of	origin;	they	are	able	to	reproduce	biologically	and	to	raise	their
children	in	a	nurturing	environment	created	by	themselves;	and	they	can	play
a	role	in	the	adult	world	of	the	society	in	which	they	exist.	Inwardly	they	form
an	ego	structure	and	a	persona	which	are	based	upon	archetypal	potentials	and
typological	tendencies.	The	major	developmental	project	in	the	first	half	of
life	is	ego	and	persona	development	to	the	point	of	individual	viability,
cultural	adaptation,	and	adult	responsibility	for	raising	children.
How	this	is	achieved	and	how	it	looks	concretely	depends	to	a	large	extent
on	the	family,	the	social	stratum,	the	culture	and	historical	period	into	which	a
person	is	born.	These	factors	will	influence	and	shape	many	of	the	details	in
the	differences	between	development	in	males	and	females,	in	the	rich	and	the
poor,	in	Eastern	and	Western	individuals.	These	same	factors	also	somewhat
dictate	the	details	of	timing	regarding	the	assumption	of	roles	and
responsibilities.	What	is	universal,	however,	and	therefore	archetypal,	is	that

every	culture	expects	and	demands	of	the	young	person	the	achievement	of
ego	development	and	adaptation.	In	all	cultures,	the	image	of	the	hero	and
heroine	are	held	up	as	ideals.	The	hero	is	an	ideal	image	of	someone	who
achieves	ego	development	as	men	are	supposed	to	emulate	and	admire;	the
heroine	is	an	image	that	supplies	this	pattern	for	women.	In	some	societies,
ego	development	and	persona	development	are	completed	for	all	practical
purposes	by	the	time	adolescence	is	fully	attained,	in	others	(like	modern
societies,	with	seemingly	interminable	educational	requirements)	it	may	not
be	completed	until	middle	age	is	immanent.
Individuation
Jung	used	the	term	individuation	to	talk	about	psychological	development,
which	he	defines	as	becoming	a	unified	but	also	unique	personality,	an
individual,	an	undivided	and	integrated	person.	Individuation	includes	more
than	the	project	achieved	ideally	in	the	first	half	of	life,	namely	ego	and
persona	development.	When	that	is	done,	another	task	begins	to	emerge,	for
the	ideal	development	of	ego	and	persona	have	left	a	great	deal	of
psychological	material	out	of	the	conscious	picture.	The	shadow	has	not	been
integrated,	the	anima	and	animus	remain	unconscious,	and	although	it	has
been	instrumental	behind	the	scenes,	the	self	has	been	hardly	glimpsed
directly.	But	now	the	question	becomes,	How	can	a	person	achieve
psychological	unity	in	the	larger	sense	of	the	term,	which	entails	uniting
conscious	and	unconscious	aspects	of	the	personality?	It	is	possible	to	fail	in
the	task	of	individuation.	One	can	remain	divided,	unintegrated,	inwardly
multiple	into	deep	old	age	and	still	be	considered	to	have	lived	a	socially	and
collectively	successful,	albeit	superficial,	life.	Deep	inner	unity	on	a
conscious	level	is	in	fact	a	rare	achievement,	although	it	is	undoubtedly
supported	by	a	very	strong	innate	impulse:	Jung	speaks	of	an	individuation
drive,	not	primarily	as	a	biological	imperative	but	rather	as	a	psychological
one.	I	will	explain	its	mechanism	in	a	moment.
Here	I	want	to	insert	a	cautionary	note	for	readers	who	wish	to	compare
Jung	to	other	psychological	theorists.	One	should	be	careful	not	to	confuse
Jung’s	concept	of	individuation	with	notions	that	go	under	this	term	in	other
psychological	theories.	This	is	similar	to	the	problem	of	comparing	Jung’s
concept	of	the	self	with	that	of	other	writers.	In	Margaret	Mahler’s	work,	for
instance,	there	is	a	strong	emphasis	on	a	process	that	she	termed

“separation/individuation.”	The	child	separates	from	its	mother	beginning	at
about	age	two	by	saying	“no.”	That	movement,	built	into	the	natural
development	of	the	psychological	individual,	takes	place	spontaneously	and
facilitates	ego	development.	It	is	archetypally	based	and	can	be	related	to	the
early	appearance	and	the	first	approximation	of	the	archetypal	pattern	of	the
hero.	For	
Jung	this	would	be	one	aspect	of	lifelong	individuation,	but
certainly	it	is	not	the	whole	story.	The	purpose	of	this	movement	toward
separation	is	to	create	a	psychological	situation	that	can	later	proceed	toward
further	steps	of	consciousness	and	finally	to	integration	and	unification	of	the
personality	as	a	whole.	For	Mahler,	separation	is	not	an	end	in	itself,	but	only
a	way	station.	Individuation	for	Jung	is	an	end	in	itself.
The	psychological	mechanism	by	which	individuation	takes	place,	whether
we	are	considering	it	in	the	first	or	the	second	half	of	life,	is	what	Jung	called
compensation.
	The	fundamental	relation	between	conscious	and	unconscious
is	compensatory.	The	growth	of	the	ego	out	of	the	unconscious—driven	by	a
powerful	instinct	to	become	separated	from	the	surrounding	world	in	order	to
adapt	more	effectively	to	the	ambient	environment—results	in	a	separation
between	ego-consciousness	and	the	unconscious	matrix	from	which	it	comes.
The	tendency	of	the	ego	is	to	become	onesided,	to	become	excessively	self-
reliant.	This	is,	as	we	have	seen,	based	on	the	archetypal	pattern	of	the	hero.
When	this	happens,	the	unconscious	begins	to	compensate	for	this	onesided-
ness.	Compensations	happen	classically	in	dreams.	The	function	of
compensation	is	to	introduce	balance	into	the	psychic	system.	These
compensations	are	tuned	precisely	to	the	present	moment,	and	their	timing	is
governed	strictly	by	what	consciousness	is	doing	or	not	doing,	by	the
onesided	attitudes	and	developments	of	ego-consciousness.	
Over	time,
however,	these	many	small	daily	compensations	add	up	to	patterns,	and	these
patterns	lay	down	the	groundwork	for	the	spiral	of	development	toward
wholeness	that	Jung	terms	individuation.	Jung	finds	this	happening	especially
clearly	in	long	series	of	dreams:	“these	apparently	separate	acts	of
compensation	arrange	themselves	into	a	kind	of	plan.	They	seem	to	hang
together	and	in	the	deepest	sense	to	be	subordinated	to	a	common	goal	…	I
have	called	this	unconscious	process	spontaneously	expressing	itself	in	the
symbolism	of	a	long	dream-series	the	individuation	process.”
2
	One	can	also
apply	this	same	rule	to	psychological	development	generally.	The
unconscious	compensates	ego-consciousness	over	the	whole	life	span	and	in
many	ways—by	slips	of	the	tongue,	forgetfulness,	or	miraculous	
revelations;
by	arranging	accidents,	disasters,	love	affairs,	and	windfalls;	by	generating
inspirational	ideas	and	hairbrained	notions	that	lead	to	disaster.	In	the	lifelong

unfolding	that	Jung	calls	individuation,	the	driving	force	is	the	self,	and	the
mechanism	by	which	it	emerges	in	the	conscious	life	of	the	individual	is
compensation.	This	is	equally	true	in	the	first	half	of	life	and	in	the	second.
The	second	half	of	life	involves	a	different	kind	of	movement	from	what
transpires	in	the	first,	however.	In	this	second	phase	of	individuation,	the
pattern’s	accent	is	not	the	separation	of	the	ego	from	its	background	and	from
its	identifications	with	the	milieu,	but	rather	the	unification	of	the	whole
personality.	Jung	would	sometimes	speak	of	the	“return	to	the	mothers,”
which	is	a	metaphorical	way	of	saying	that	when	ego	development	climaxes
at	midlife	there	is	no	further	meaning	in	continuing	to	pursue	the	same	old
goals.	In	fact,	some	of	the	goals	already	achieved	are	now	called	into	question
as	ultimate	values,	and	this	leads	to	reassessment	of	what	has	been	achieved
and	reassessment	on	where	further	meaning	lies.
3
	There	is	more	to	life	than
making	one’s	way	in	the	world	with	a	solid	and	well-structured	ego	and
persona.	“Been	there,	done	that”	sums	up	the	mood	of	the	midlifer.	Now
what?	Meaning	lies	elsewhere,	and	psychic	energy	changes	its	course.	The
task	now	becomes	to	unify	the	ego	with	the	unconscious,	which	contains	the
person’s	unlived	life	and	unrealized	potential.	This	development	in	the	second
half	of	life	is	the	classic	Jungian	meaning	of	individuation—becoming	what
you	already	are	potentially,	but	now	more	deeply	and	more	consciously.	This
requires	the	enabling	power	of	symbols	which	lift	up	and	make	available
contents	of	the	unconscious	that	have	been	obscured	from	view.	The	ego	is
unable	to	carry	out	this	larger	unification	of	the	personality	by	its	own	efforts.
It	needs	an	angel	to	assist.
Jung	himself	did	not	spend	much	time	considering	the	issues	of	the	first
half	of	life	after	his	break	with	Freud.	He	was	mainly	interested	in	people
such	as	the	fifty-three-year-old	woman	described	in	“A	Study	in	the	Process
of	Individuation.”
4
	Most	of	his	own	patients	were	adults	of	this	type.	Not
seriously	mentally	
ill,	not	in	need	of	hospital	or	medical	treatment,	no	longer
in	the	early	stages	of	their	lives,	these	people	came	to	Jung	for	wisdom	and
guidance	in	pursuing	further	inner	development.	This	is	not	to	say	that	some
were	not	neurotic	and	in	need	of	psychological	help	too,	but	they	were	not
typical	psychiatric	patients.	In	fact,	Jung	preferred	working	with	people
whose	ego-building	and	child-bearing	years	were	past	and	whose	first	half	of
life	developments	had	already	taken	place.	Now	was	the	opportunity	to
pursue	the	second	great	phase	of	the	individuation	process,	the	more	explicit
emergence	of	the	self	into	consciousness.	The	methods	Jung	used	to	help
them	with	this	complex	project	have	come	to	be	called	Jungian	analysis.
Psychological	change	and	development	in	adulthood	and	old	age	are	in

some	ways	more	subtle	than	development	in	the	first	half	of	life.	One	has	to
observe	people	very	carefully	and	at	deep	levels	to	perceive	it.	And
sometimes	there	is	not	much	to	observe	because	the	development	has	been	so
minimal.	For	instance,	my	best	childhood	friend’s	father,	at	eighty-nine,	had
aged	noticeably	in	the	thirty	years	since	I	had	last	seen	him.	Clearly	he	was
nearing	the	end	of	his	life.	Yet,	although	his	body	had	altered	greatly,	his
persona,	his	sense	of	humor,	his	personality	had	not	seemingly	changed	very
much,	and	on	this	account	he	was	as	familiar	and	recognizable	as	ever.	When
I	met	him	again	after	all	these	years,	I	knew	him	immediately.	To	me,	his
personality,	as	I	could	see	it	and	experience	it,	was	utterly	intact	and	the	same.
While	his	energy	may	have	been	less	than	it	once	was,	he	could	still	muster
enough	to	carry	on	a	lively	conversation	about	the	newest	models	of	his
favorite	automobiles.	He	remained	more	or	less	the	same	person	he	always
was,	even	though	his	body	was	shrunken	and	weaker.
Had	there	been	any	development	in	his	psyche	in	the	course	of	his
adulthood	after	the	age	of	50?	Had	his	attitudes	changed?	How	well	did	I
know	him?	I	knew	him	as	a	child	and	then	no	more,	so	I	had	only	a	child’s
view	of	him.	I	knew	his	persona,	but	that	is	all.	To	all	appearances,	his
persona	had	remained	intact.	But	as	we	know,	there	is	a	good	more	to	the
psyche	than	the	persona.	And	yet,	if	the	persona	does	not	change,	is	there
deeper	change	either?
Is	it	so	subtle	we	can’t	see	it	without	deep	interpretive,	probing	interviews?
Perhaps	his	consciousness	had	developed	dramatically	beyond	where	it	was
when	I	knew	him	so	long	ago,	but	I	could	not	see	it.	Jung	resisted	the	notion
that	the	psychological	trajectory	is	identical	to	the	physical,	which	shows
mostly	only	decline	in	old	age.	Are	there	psychological	compensations	that
outweigh	the	physical	decay	and	show	a	different	pattern?
The	Five	Stages	of	Consciousness
To	get	a	handle	on	this	question	of	development	of	consciousness	in	the
second	half	of	life,	we	can	apply	some	general	measuring	sticks.	Jung
described	five	stages	of	development	of	consciousness,	
5
	which	I	will
summarize	and	expand	a	bit.	We	can	use	these	to	measure	and	assess
development	of	consciousness	in	children	and	also	in	adults	in	their	later
years.

The	first	stage	is	characterized	by	
participation	mystique
,	a	term	borrowed
from	the	French	anthropologist,	Lévy-Bruhl.	Participation	mystique	refers	to
an	identification	between	an	individual’s	consciousness	and	the	surrounding
world,	without	awareness	that	one	is	in	this	state;	consciousness	and	the
object	with	which	one	is	identified	are	mysteriously	the	same	thing.	There	is
an	absence	of	awareness	of	a	difference	between	oneself	and	one’s
perceptions	on	the	one	hand	and	the	object	in	question	on	the	other.	To	some
extent,	people	stay	in	this	state	of	participation	mystique	all	their	lives.	For
example,	many	people	identify	in	this	way	with	their	cars.	They	experience
all	kinds	of	self	feelings	about	their	cars.	When	the	car	develops	a	problem,
its	owner	feels	sick,	comes	down	with	a	cold,	gets	a	stomach	ache.	We	are
unconsciously	united	with	the	world	around	us.	This	is	what	Jung	called
participation	mystique.
Most	people	are	connected	to	their	families,	at	the	beginning	of	life	at	least,
by	participation	mystique,	which	is	based	on	identification,	introjection,	and
projection.	These	terms	describe	the	same	thing:	an	intermingling	of	inner	and
outer	contents.	The	infant	is	at	first	literally	not	able	to	distinguish	where	it
leaves	off	and	where	mother	begins.	The	infant’s	world	is	highly	unified.	In
this	sense	the	first	stage	of	consciousness	anticipates	the	final	stage:	ultimate
unification	of	the	parts	into	a	whole.	At	the	beginning,	however,	it	is
unconscious	wholeness,	whereas	at	the	end	the	sense	of	wholeness	is
conscious.
In	the	second	stage	of	consciousness,	projections	become	more	localized.
After	the	hit-or-miss	projections	in	the	first	stage,	some	self/other	distinctions
begin	to	appear	in	consciousness.	The	infant	becomes	aware	of	certain	places
where	its	own	physical	being	collides	with	outside	objects,	and	it	begins	to
watch	out	for	things	and	to	recognize	differences	between	self	and	other	and
among	the	objects	in	the	world	around	it.	Slowly	this	differentiation	between
self	and	other	and	between	inner	and	outer	increases	and	sharpens.	When
good	subject/object	differentiation	exists	and	when	self	and	other	are	distinct
and	clearly	different,	projection	and	participation	mystique	change.	This	does
not	mean	that	projection	has	been	overcome,	but	only	that	it	has	become	more
localized,	focusing	on	a	few	objects	rather	than	on	the	whole	wide	world.
Some	objects	in	the	world	are	clearly	now	more	important	and	interesting
than	others	because	they	carry	projections	and	are	the	recipients	of	libidinal
investment.	Mother,	favorite	toys,	bright	moving	objects,	pets,	father,	other
people	become	special	and	singled	out	and	distinct.	So	as	conscious
development	proceeds,	differentiation	takes	place	and	projection	becomes
fixed	on	specific	figures.	And	since	projections	fall	on	the	unknown,	the

world	offers	plenty	of	opportunity	to	continue	the	process	of	projecting
throughout	one’s	entire	lifetime.
Parents	are	early	major	carriers	of	projection,	and	children	unconsciously
project	omnipotence	and	omniscience	onto	them.	These	are	what	Jung	called
archetypal	projections.	The	parents	become	gods,	invested	with	powers	that
people	have	attributed	to	the	divine.	“Daddy	can	do	anything!	He’s	the
strongest	guy	in	the	whole	world!”	“Mother	knows	everything	and	can
perform	miracles.	She	also	loves	me	unconditionally!”	The	shocking
realization	that	one’s	parents	do	not	know	everything	and	are	anything	but
godlike	usually	occurs	during	the	teenage	years,	and	then	for	a	time	parents
don’t	know	anything	at	all	(another	kind	of	projection).	We	also	project	onto
siblings;	this	lies	at	the	root	of	sibling	
rivalry	and	the	kind	of	competitive	and
sometimes	vicious	dynamics	that	go	on	in	families.	Teachers	and	school	itself
also	receive	many	projections.	In	fact,	numerous	figures	in	our	environment
become	carriers	of	projection	in	the	second	stage	of	consciousness.	This	gives
people	and	institutions	the	power	to	form	and	shape	our	consciousness
powerfully,	filling	it	with	their	knowledge	and	opinions	and	gradually
replacing	our	own	personal	experience	with	collective	opinions,	views,	and
values.	This	is	the	process	of	acculturation	and	adaptation	that	takes	place	in
childhood	and	adolescence.
Falling	in	love	and	getting	married	are	typically	based	on	massive	anima
and	animus	projections,	and	this	leads	directly	into	childbearing	and	rearing
during	which	the	children	become	carriers	of	divine	child	projections.	Like
the	first	stage,	the	second	is	one	that	no	one	leaves	behind	completely.	As
long	as	one	is	able	to	be	enchanted,	to	feel	the	stir	of	adventure	and	romance,
to	risk	all	for	a	mighty	conviction,	one	continues	to	operate	out	of	projection
onto	concrete	objects	in	the	world.	And	for	many	the	development	of
consciousness	stops	here.	Such	individuals	continue	to	project	positive	and
negative	features	of	the	psyche	massively	into	the	world	around	and	to
respond	to	the	psyche’s	images	and	powers	as	though	they	were	located	in
external	objects	and	persons.
If	conscious	development	does	continue—which	can	begin	when	a	new
phase	of	cognitive	development	leads	to	the	ability	to	reach	a	level	of
abstraction	that	is	relatively	free	of	concretism—one	becomes	aware	that
specific	projection	carriers	are	not	identical	with	the	projections	they	carry.
The	persons	who	have	carried	the	projections	can	step	out	from	behind	the
projections,	and	as	a	result	they	often	become	de-idealized.	At	this	stage,	the
world	loses	much	of	its	naive	enchantment.	The	projected	psychic	contents
become	abstract,	and	they	now	manifest	as	symbols	and	ideologies.

Omniscience	and	omnipotence	are	no	longer	granted	to	human	beings,	but
such	qualities	are	projected	onto	abstract	entities	such	as	God,	Fate,	and
Truth.	Philosophy	and	theology	become	possible.	Supreme	values	take	on	the
numinous	power	once	attributed	to	parents	and	teachers.	The	Law	or	the
Revelation	or	the	Teachings	become	invested	with	archetypal	
projections,	and
the	concrete	everyday	world	becomes	relatively	free	of	projections	and	can	be
interacted	with	as	neutral.	To	the	extent	that	this	stage	of	consciousness	is
attained,	a	person	becomes	less	vulnerable	to	fears	of	evil	enemies	and	forces.
One	need	not	fear	the	reprisals	of	human	enemies	because	God	is	in	control.
Or	it	is	assumed	that	one	can	manipulate	and	take	control	of	the	world
rationally	because	it	obeys	the	laws	of	nature	and	is	free	of	spirits	and	demons
who	might	not	like	a	highway	here	or	a	dwelling	place	there.	One	does	not
seem	to	keep	running	into	oneself,	feeling	so	directly	the	pain	of	what	one	is
doing	to	the	object.
The	spontaneous	empathic	response	to	suffering	among	creatures	in	the
world	and	to	the	destruction	of	the	natural	world	is	decreased	to	a
considerable	extent	when	the	self/object	dichotomy	has	reached	this	point.	To
many	this	does	not	seem	to	be	an	advance	but	rather	a	decline	in
consciousness.	But	it	must	be	recognized	that	the	emotional	reactions	of
empathy	manifested	in	the	earlier	developmental	stages	are	largely	based	on
projection	and	have	little	to	do	with	an	objective	evaluation	of	what	is
happening	to	the	object.	When	projections	are	removed	from	concrete	objects
in	the	world,	visionary	political	leaders	and	charismatic	ideologues	create
abstractions	in	the	form	of	ideas,	values,	or	ideologies	by	the	projections	fed
into	concepts	that	state	what	is	of	highest	value	and	the	greatest	good	in	their
perception.	On	the	basis	of	these	values,	one	can	develop	a	set	of	imperatives
and	“oughts”	that	stand	in	place	of	the	natural,	spontaneous	emotional
relationships	that	less	conscious	people	enjoy	with	the	world.	In	place	of
unconscious	empathy	based	on	participation	mystique	or	projection,	one	has
rules	that	dictate	duty.	One	does	the	right	thing	ecologically,	for	instance,	not
out	of	feeling	but	out	of	duty,	not	because	one	gets	sick	with	pain	for	the
destruction	of	the	natural	world	but	because	of	a	moral	imperative	to	sort	the
garbage	and	burn	less	fuel.
In	this	third	stage	of	consciousness—which	is	I	believe	what	my	friend’s
father	reached,	for	he	was	a	religious	man	in	the	traditional	sense—there	are
still	projections	of	unconscious	material.	But	these	projections	are	invested
not	so	much	in	persons	and	
things	but	in	principles	and	symbols	and
teachings.	Of	course,	these	projections	are	still	considered	“real”	in	an	almost
concrete	sense.	God	really	does	exist	somewhere,	He	or	She	is	a	distinct

personality,	and	so	on.	As	long	as	one	believes	that	an	actual	God	will	punish
or	reward	one	in	the	afterlife,	this	indicates	a	Stage	3	level	of	consciousness.
The	projection	has	simply	become	transferred	from	the	human	parent	to	a
more	abstract,	mythological	figure.
The	fourth	stage	represents	the	radical	extinction	of	projections,	even	in	the
form	of	theological	and	ideological	abstractions.	This	extinction	leads	to	the
creation	of	an	“empty	center,”	which	Jung	identifies	with	modernity.	This	is
the	“modern	man	in	search	of	his	soul.”
6
	The	sense	of	soul—of	grand
meaning	and	purpose	in	life,	immortality,	divine	origin,	a	“God	within”—is
replaced	by	utilitarian	and	pragmatic	values.	“Does	it	work?”	becomes	the
primary	question.	Humans	come	to	see	themselves	as	cogs	in	a	huge	socio-
economic	machine,	and	their	expectations	for	meaning	are	scaled	down	to
bite	size	chunks.	One	settles	for	moments	of	pleasure	and	the	satisfactions	of
manageable	desires.	Or	one	becomes	depressed!	Gods	no	longer	inhabit	the
heavens,	and	demons	are	converted	into	psychological	symptoms	and	brain
chemical	imbalances.	The	world	is	stripped	of	projected	psychic	contents.	No
more	heroes,	no	more	evil	villains—humans	become	realistic.	Principles	are
only	relatively	valid,	and	values	are	seen	as	derived	from	cultural	norms	and
expectations.	Everything	cultural	appears	to	be	manufactured	and	without
inherent	meaning.	Nature	and	history	are	regarded	as	the	product	of	chance
and	the	random	play	of	impersonal	forces.	Here	we	arrive	at	the	attitude	and
feeling-tone	of	the	modern	person:	secular,	atheistic,	perhaps	slightly
humanistic.	A	modern	person’s	values	seem	hedged	about	with	reservations,
conditions,	“maybe’s,”	“not	sure’s.”	The	modern	stance	is	relativistic.
In	this	fourth	stage	of	consciousness,	it	
seems
	as	if	psychic	projections	have
disappeared	altogether.	Jung	points	out,	however,	that	this	is	undoubtedly	a
false	assumption.	In	actuality	the	ego	itself	has	become	invested	with	the
contents	previously	projected	out	onto	others	and	objects	and	abstractions.
Thus	the	ego	is	
radically	inflated	in	the	modern	person	and	assumes	a	secret
God-Almighty	position.	The	ego,	rather	than	Laws	or	Teachings,	is	now	the
recipient	of	projections,	good	and	bad.	The	ego	becomes	the	sole	arbiter	of
right	and	wrong,	true	and	false,	beautiful	and	ugly.	There	is	no	authority
outside	of	the	ego	that	exceeds	it.	Meaning	must	be	created	by	the	ego;	it
cannot	be	discovered	elsewhere.	God	is	not	“out	there”	any	more,	it’s	me!
While	the	modern	person	appears	to	be	reasonable	and	grounded,	actually	he
is	mad.	But	this	is	hidden,	a	sort	of	secret	kept	even	from	oneself.
Jung	believed	this	fourth	stage	to	be	an	extremely	dangerous	state	of	affairs
for	the	obvious	reason	that	an	inflated	ego	is	unable	to	adapt	very	well	to	the
environment	and	so	is	liable	to	make	catastrophic	errors	in	judgment.	While

this	is	an	advance	of	consciousness	in	a	personal	and	even	a	cultural	sense,	it
is	dangerous	because	of	the	potential	for	megalomania.	Anything	goes!	If	I
want	to	do	it	and	figure	I	can	get	away	with	it,	it	must	be	okay.	Not	at	all
immune	to	the	seductive	persuasions	of	the	shadow,	the	ego	is	easily	led	to
indulge	in	the	shadow’s	lust	for	power	and	its	wishes	to	gain	total	control	of
the	world.	This	was	Nietzsche’s	Superman,	and	this	hubris	is	reflected	in	the
various	social	and	political	catastrophes	of	the	twentieth	century.	Already
prefigured	in	Dostoevski’s	protagonist	Raskolnikov	in	
Crime	and
Punishment,
	
we	now	witness	a	human	being	who	will	kill	an	old	woman
simply	to	see	how	it	feels.	The	Stage	4	person	is	no	longer	controlled	by
societal	conventions	related	either	to	people	or	values.	Consequently	the	ego
can	consider	unlimited	possibilities	of	action.	This	does	not	mean	that	all
modern	people	are	sociopathic,	but	the	doors	for	such	a	development	are	wide
open.	And	the	worst	cases	might	be	those	that	look	most	reasonable—the
“best	and	the	brightest”	who	think	they	can	calculate	an	answer	to	all
questions	of	policy	and	morality.
Jung	said	jokingly	that	on	the	street	one	meets	people	at	all	stages	of
development—Neanderthals,	medieval	people,	moderns,	people	at	all
conceivable	levels	of	conscious	development.	Living	in	the	twentieth	century
does	not	automatically	confer	the	status	of	modernity	on	one’s	development
of	consciousness.	Not	everybody	approaches	Stage	4.	In	fact,	many	people
cannot	bear	its	
demands.	Others	consider	it	evil.	The	fundamentalisms	of	the
world	insist	on	clinging	to	Stages	2	and	3	out	of	fear	of	the	corrosive	effects
of	Stage	4	and	of	the	despair	and	the	emptiness	it	engenders.	But	it	is	a	real
psychological	achievement	when	projections	have	been	removed	to	this
extent	and	individuals	take	personal	responsibility	for	their	destinies.	The	trap
is	that	the	psyche	becomes	hidden	in	the	ego’s	shadow.
These	first	four	stages	in	the	development	of	consciousness	have	to	do	with
ego	development	and	the	first	half	of	life.	The	person	who	has	achieved	the
self-critical	and	reflective	ego	characteristic	of	Stage	4	without	falling	into
megalomaniac	inflation	has	done	extremely	well	in	developing	consciousness,
and	is	highly	evolved	in	Jung’s	assessment.	But	further	development	in	the
second	half	of	life	is	reserved	by	Jung	for	a	fifth	stage,	a	postmodern	stage,
which	has	to	do	with	approaching	the	re-unification	of	conscious	and
unconscious.	In	this	stage,	there	is	conscious	recognition	of	ego	limitation	and
awareness	of	the	powers	of	the	unconscious,	and	a	form	of	union	becomes
possible	between	conscious	and	unconscious	through	what	Jung	called	the
transcendent	function	and	the	unifying	symbol.	The	psyche	becomes	unified
but,	unlike	Stage	1,	the	parts	remain	differentiated	and	contained	within

consciousness.	And	unlike	Stage	4,	the	ego	is	not	identified	with	the
archetypes:	the	archetypal	images	remain	“other,”	they	are	not	hidden	in	the
ego’s	shadow.	They	are	now	seen	as	“in	there,”	unlike	in	Stage	3	where	they
are	“out	there”	in	metaphysical	space	somewhere,	concretely,	and	they	are	not
projected	onto	anything	external.
The	expression	“postmodern”	is	mine,	not	Jung’s.	His	fifth	stage	of
consciousness	is	not	“postmodern”	in	the	sense	of	the	word	as	used	in	the	arts
and	in	literary	criticism	but	in	the	sense	of	a	stage	that	transcends	and
supersedes	the	“modern.”	It	goes	beyond	the	modern	ego	that	has	seen
through	everything	and	does	not	believe	in	the	reality	of	the	psyche.	The
modern	stance	is	a	“nothing	but”	attitude.	It	is	convinced	that	projections	have
been	eliminated	and	that	they	were	nothing	but	a	lot	of	smoke	and	mirrors
signifying	nothing.	The	postmodern	attitude	recognizes	that	there	is	psychic
reality	in	projections,	but	not	in	the	concrete	or	
material	sense.	If	we	heard	so
much	noise	in	the	woods,	maybe	something	was	out	there	after	all.	Not	what
we	thought,	but	something	real	nevertheless.	Can	we	observe	it?	Can	we
intuit	it?	Can	we	conceive	of	it?	The	psyche	itself	then	becomes	the	object	of
scrutiny	and	reflection.	How	to	capture	it	in	our	observations?	How	to	relate
to	it	when	we	do?	These	are	the	postmodern	issues	and	questions.	And	so
Jung’s	attempts	at	formulating	a	suitable	epistemology	in	
Psychological	Types
(a	“critical	psychology,”	as	he	called	it)	was	an	effort	to	lay	the	groundwork
for	approaching	the	psyche	as	an	entity	in	its	own	right.	His	techniques	of
active	imagination	and	dream	interpretation	lend	themselves	to	interacting
with	the	psyche	directly	and	forming	a	conscious	relationship	with	it.	In	this
way,	he	was	forging	the	tools	to	relate	to	life	in	a	postmodern,	conscious	way
and	to	take	up	a	respectful	position	toward	the	same	contents	that	primitive
and	traditional	peoples	find	in	their	myths	and	theologies,	that	infants	and
young	children	project	into	their	parents	and	toys	and	games,	and	that	the
deeply	insane	and	psychotic	mental	patients	see	in	their	hallucinations	and
visions.	The	contents	are	common	to	all	of	us,	and	they	make	up	the	deepest
and	most	primitive	layers	of	the	psyche,	the	collective	unconscious.	To
approach	the	archetypal	images	and	to	relate	to	them	consciously	and
creatively	becomes	the	centerpiece	of	individuation	and	makes	up	the	task	of
the	fifth	stage	of	consciousness.	This	stage	of	consciousness	produces	another
movement	in	the	individuation	process.	The	ego	and	the	unconscious	become
joined	through	a	symbol.
Officially	Jung	stopped	at	Stage	5,	although	in	several	places	he	indicates
that	he	contemplated	further	advances	beyond	it.	There	are	suggestions	in	his
writings	for	what	could	be	considered	a	sixth	and	perhaps	even	a	seventh

stage.	For	example,	in	his	Kundalini	Yoga	Seminar,
7
	given	in	1932,	Jung
clearly	recognizes	the	attainment	of	states	of	consciousness	in	the	East	that	far
surpass	what	is	known	in	the	West.	While	he	is	dubious	about	the	prospects
for	Westerners	to	achieve	similar	stages	of	consciousness	in	the	foreseeable
future,	he	nevertheless	does	grant	the	theoretical	possibility	of	doing	so	and
even	describes	some	of	the	features	such	stages	would	have.	The	type	of
consciousness	revealed	in	Kundalini	could	be	considered	a	potential	Stage	7.
Backing	up	a	bit,	there	is	a	type	of	consciousness	that	is	more	accessible	to
the	West	and	would	occupy	a	place	between	Stage	5	and	this	putative	Stage	7.
Later	in	his	own	life	when	he	explored	the	structure	and	function	of	the
archetypes	in	the	context	of	synchronicity,	Jung	suggested	that	perhaps	these
apparently	inner	structures	correspond	to	structures	of	being	in	the
nonpsychic	world.	I	discuss	this	in	more	detail	in	chapter	9,	but	for	now	it	is
sufficient	to	suggest	that	a	possible	sixth	stage	of	consciousness	would	be	one
that	takes	into	account	the	wider	ecological	relation	between	psyche	and
world.	For	Westerners,	who	are	fundamentally	conditioned	by	a	materialistic
attitude,	this	is	a	possible	developmental	option.	Stage	6,	then,	could	be	seen
as	a	state	of	consciousness	that	recognizes	the	unity	of	psyche	and	the
material	world.	Jung	moved	cautiously	in	exploring	such	territories,	however,
because	here	he	was	clearly	passing	from	psychology	as	we	have	known	it	in
the	West	into	physics,	cosmology	and	metaphysics,	areas	in	which	he	did	not
feel	intellectually	qualified	and	competent.	Nevertheless	his	thinking	led	him
step	by	step	in	that	direction,	and	we	have	to	grant	that	he	showed	the	courage
to	follow	his	intuitions.	His	conversations	with	modern	physicists	like
Wolfgang	Pauli,	with	whom	he	published	a	book,
8
	were	an	attempt	to	work
out	some	of	those	correlations	and	correspondences	between	the	psyche	and
the	physical	world.
The	five	stages	of	development	of	consciousness	described	above	are
mentioned	briefly	by	Jung	in	two	paragraphs	in	the	essay,	“The	Spirit
Mercurius.”
9
	I	have	expanded	upon	that	by	using	several	other	sources	in	his
work.	The	theme	of	individuation	appears	throughout	his	written	works	from
1910	onwards.	It	is	a	constant	preoccupation	that	deepens	as	he	pursues	his
investigations	of	the	structure	and	dynamics	of	the	psyche.	It	is	still	on	his
mind	in	the	late	essay	“A	Psychological	View	of	Conscience,”
10
	
which	was
published	in	1958	some	three	years	before	his	death	at	the	age	of	86.	Almost
everything	he	wrote	touches	in	one	way	or	another	upon	the	theme	of
individuation.	There	are	two	classic	texts	on	this	topic,	however,	and	in	the
remainder	of	this	chapter	I	will	focus	on	them.	They	are	“Conscious,
Unconscious,	and	Individuation”
11
	and	“A	Study	in	the	Process	of

Individuation.”
12
In	the	paper,	“Consciousness,	Unconsciousness,	and	Individuation,”	Jung
offers	a	succinct	summary	of	what	he	means	by	the	term	individuation.	He
begins	by	saying	it	is	the	process	by	which	a	person	becomes	a	psychological
individual,	which	is	to	say,	a	separate	undivided	conscious	unity,	a	distinct
whole.	I	have	explained	some	of	the	implications	of	this	above,	as	a	process
of	first	unifying	ego-consciousness	and	then	the	whole	psychic	system	of
conscious	and	unconscious,	in	order	to	approach	what	Jung	would	ultimately
call	wholeness.	Wholeness	is	the	master	term	that	describes	the	goal	of	the
individuation	process,	and	it	is	the	expression	within	psychological	life	of	the
self	archetype.
The	way	into	the	unconscious,	Jung	points	out,	lies	initially	through
emotion	and	affect.	An	active	complex	makes	itself	known	through	disrupting
the	ego	with	affect.	This	is	a	compensation	from	the	unconscious	and	offers
potential	for	growth.	Eventually,	he	goes	on,	these	affective	disturbances	can
be	traced	to	primordial	roots	in	instinct,	but	they	can	also	lead	to	images	that
anticipate	the	future.	Jung	posits	a	finalistic	point	of	view,	a	movement
toward	a	goal.	In	order	to	approach	wholeness,	the	conscious/unconscious
systems	must	be	brought	into	relationship	with	one	another:	“The	psyche
consists	of	two	incongruous	halves	which	together	form	a	whole.”
13
	He	then
presents	a	practical	method	that	people	can	use	to	work	on	uniting	the
disparate	halves	of	the	psyche.
He	is	addressing	what	I	described	above	as	Western	people	in	Stage	4	who
“believe	in	ego-consciousness	and	in	what	we	call	reality.	The	realities	of	a
northern	climate	are	somehow	so	convincing	that	we	feel	very	much	better	off
when	we	do	not	forget	them.	For	us	it	makes	sense	to	concern	ourselves	with
reality.	Our	European	ego-consciousness	is	therefore	inclined	to	swallow	up
the	unconscious,	and	if	this	should	not	prove	feasible	we	try	to	suppress	it.
But	if	we	understand	anything	of	the	unconscious,	we	know	that	it	cannot	be
swallowed.	We	also	know	that	it	is	dangerous	to	suppress	it,	because	the
unconscious	is	life	and	this	life	turns	against	us	if	suppressed,	as	happens	in
neurosis.”
14
	Neurosis	is	based	on	an	internal	conflict	that	guarantees	one-
sidedness:	The	unconscious	is	repressed,	and	a	person	ends	up	in	an	energic
impasse.	With	energy	being	used	for	such	a	narrow	range	of	activities	and	for
defenses	against	the	sealed-off	unconscious,	much	of	life’s	possibilities	for
wholeness	and	satisfaction	are	denied.	Often	a	person	becomes	extremely
isolated,	and	life	becomes	sterile	and	may	reach	a	standstill.	“Conscious	and
unconscious	do	not	make	a	whole	when	one	of	them	is	suppressed	and	injured

by	the	other.	If	they	must	contend,	let	it	at	least	be	a	fair	fight	with	equal
rights	on	both	sides.	Both	are	aspects	of	life.	Consciousness	should	defend	its
reason	and	protect	itself,	and	the	chaotic	life	of	the	unconscious	should	be
given	the	chance	of	having	its	way	too—as	much	of	it	as	we	can	stand.	This
means	open	conflict	and	open	collaboration	at	once.	That,	evidently,	is	the
way	human	life	should	be.	It	is	the	old	game	of	hammer	and	anvil:	between
them	the	patient	iron	is	forged	into	an	indestructible	whole,	an	‘individual’.”
15
Forging	an	indestructible	whole	between	hammer	and	anvil!	This	vivid
image	speaks	of	the	nature	of	the	individuation	process	as	Jung	understood	it.
Not	fundamentally	a	quiet	process	of	incubation	and	growth,	it	is	instead	a
vigorous	conflict	between	opposites.	What	one	gains	by	taking	up	the	task	of
facing	the	conflict	between	persona	and	shadow,	for	instance,	or	between	ego
and	anima,	is	“mettle,”	the	knowledge	gained	through	experience	of	the
encounter	
(Auseinandersetzung,
	as	Jung	named	it	in	German)	between
conscious	and	unconscious.	“This,	roughly,	is	what	I	mean	by	the
individuation	process.	As	the	name	shows,	it	is	a	process	or	course	of
development	arising	out	of	the	conflict	between	the	two	fundamental	psychic
facts	[conscious	and	unconscious].”
16
A	Case	Study	in	Individuation
In	the	second	essay,	“A	Study	in	the	Process	of	Individuation,”	Jung	provides
more	concrete	detail	about	the	individuation	process,	at	least	in	its	earlier
stages	during	the	second	half	of	life.	In	this	study,	he	describes	a	woman
patient	who	is	fifty-five	years	old	and	comes	to	work	with	him	after	moving
back	to	Europe	from	abroad.	She	is	a	“father’s	daughter,”	highly	cultured	and
educated.	She	is	unmarried,	“but	[she]	lived	with	the	unconscious	equivalent
of	a	human	partner,	namely	the	animus	…	in	that	characteristic	liaison	often
met	with	in	women	with	an	academic	education.”
17
	He	is	speaking	here	about
a	modern	woman.	This	was	obviously	a	fascinating	and	instructive	case	for
him.	She	was	not	a	traditional	mother	and	housewife	who	needed	to	develop
her	intellect	and	spiritual	side	(animus	development)	in	the	second	half	of	life,
which	was	the	way	he	had	usually	thought	of	women’s	individuation.	Rather,
this	was	a	women	with	a	very	strong	intellectual	development	and	a	career.
But	she	was	male-identified,	and	she	was	now	on	a	quest	to	discover
something	about	her	Scandinavian	mother	and	her	motherland.	She	wanted	to

get	in	touch	with	the	feminine	side	of	her	personality,	which	to	her	was
unconscious.
Actually	many	women	of	this	type	would	continue	to	come	to	Jung	for
treatment	in	the	following	years.	This	patient	is	similar	to	many	women	today
who,	having	put	education	ahead	of	starting	a	family	and	having	children,
pursue	a	career,	perhaps	to	the	point	where	childbearing	becomes	a	receding
mirage.	In	1928,	however,	this	was	still	a	rather	unusual	woman.
The	patient	started	drawing	pictures	and	painting.	She	was	not	a	trained
artist,	which	was	an	advantage	for	analysis	because	this	allowed	the
unconscious	to	express	itself	in	a	more	direct	and	spontaneous	way.	This
patient	commented	that	her	eyes	wanted	to	do	one	thing,	but	her	head	wanted
her	to	do	another,	and	she	let	the	eyes	have	their	way,	indicating	that	the
emerging	new	center	of	consciousness	had	a	will	of	its	own.	It	wanted	it	this
way,	not	that	way,	and	she	could	allow	that	to	happen.	
Geschenlassen
(“letting	it	happen”)	is	the	way	to	capture	the	unconscious	at	work.	Jung	did
not	actively	interpret	the	psychological	meaning	of	her	drawings	and	painting
but	rather	participated	in	the	process	by	encouraging	the	woman	to	“let	it
happen”	as	her	unconscious	wanted.	Often	he	did	not	even	understand	what
the	pictures	wanted	to	say	beyond	their	manifest	content.	He	simply
encouraged	her	to	stay	with	it.	Gradually	a	story	could	be	seen	unfolding,	a
development	took	place,	and	this	showed	its	purpose	in	due	time.
Picture	1
18
	shows	the	patient’s	initial	situation:	it	depicts	the	condition	of
being	psychologically	and	developmentally	stuck.	A	woman’s	body	is
embedded	in	rock	and	is	obviously	struggling	to	become	free.	This	is	the
condition	of	the	patient	as	she	begins	analysis.	Picture	2	shows	a	bolt	of
lightning	striking	the	rock	and	separating	a	round	stone	from	the	others.	This
stone	represents	the	woman’s	core	(the	self).	Jung	comments	that	this	picture
represents	the	release	of	the	self	from	the	unconscious:	“The	lightening	has
released	the	spherical	form	from	the	rock	and	so	caused	a	kind	of
liberation.”
19
	The	patient	associated	the	lightning	with	her	analyst.	The
transference	has	begun	to	have	its	profound	effect	upon	her	personality.	In	the
drama,	Jung	is	represented	by	lightning,	which	is	also	the	masculine	element
of	her	own	personality	that	strikes	and	fertilizes.	Jung	notes	the	sexual
overtones	of	this	imagery.
Later	in	the	text,	Jung	speaks	of	himself	as	a	projection-carrier	for	the
patient’s	inferior	function,	intuition:	“The	‘inferior’	function	…	[has]	the
significance	of	a	releasing	or	‘redeeming’	function.	We	know	from	experience
that	the	inferior	function	always	compensates,	complements,	and	balances	the

‘superior’	function.	My	psychic	peculiarity	would	make	me	a	suitable
projection	carrier	in	this	respect.”
20
	As	the	carrier	for	her	projections,	Jung’s
words	and	presence	became	compensatory	to	the	patient’s	consciousness	and
also	greatly	exaggerated	in	their	power	and	effectiveness.	She	would	see	him
as	a	genius	of	intuition,	one	who	knows	and	understands	everything.	This	is
the	kind	of	thing	a	strong	transference	typically	says	to	a	patient.	It	is	Jung’s
intuition,	then,	that	hits	the	patient	like	a	lightning	bolt	and	has	such	a
profound	effect	on	her.	Because	it	is	also	the	patient’s	inferior	function,	“it
hits	consciousness	unexpectedly,	like	lightning,	and	occasionally	with
devastating	consequences.	It	thrusts	the	ego	aside,	and	makes	room	for	a
supraordinate	factor,	the	totality	of	a	person.”
21
This	picture	therefore	represents	the	ego	being	pushed	aside.	and	the	self
making	its	first	appearance.	The	rock	that	is	broken	loose	does	not	represent
her	ego	but	rather	the	self.	The	lightning	frees	her	potential	for	wholeness,
which	until	now	had	been	
locked	away	in	the	unconscious.	“This	self	was
always	present,	but	sleeping.”
22
	This	woman’s	remarkable	ego	development
had	left	the	self	behind,	and	she	had	gotten	stuck	in	persona	adaptations	and
in	an	identification	with	the	father	complex	and	the	animus,	the	“rocks”	of	her
painting.	From	these	identifications	she	needed	to	be	freed.	The	possibility	for
contacting	and	becoming	more	connected	to	the	self,	which	lies	at	the	heart	of
the	individuation	process,	must	be	released	from	the	unconscious,	and	in	this
case	it	happens	through	the	action	of	therapeutic	lightning.	For	good	reason
Jung	said	that	transference	is	critical	for	success	in	therapy.
Before	his	comments	on	the	third	picture,	a	crucial	one	in	the	series,	Jung
says	in	passing	that	“the	third	picture	…	brings	a	motif	that	points
unmistakably	to	alchemy	and	actually	gave	me	the	definitive	incentive	to
make	a	thorough	study	of	the	works	of	the	old	adepts.”
23
	This	is	a	remarkable
statement	in	light	of	the	fact	that	Jung	spent	a	good	deal	of	the	rest	of	his	life
studying	alchemy	in	great	depth	and	intensity.	Picture	3	depicts	“an	hour	of
birth—not	of	the	dreamer	but	of	the	self.”
24
	The	image	is	of	a	dark	blue
sphere	floating	freely	in	space,	a	“planet	in	the	making.”
25
	
This	is	the
appearance	of	what	the	patient	called	her	“true	personality,”	and	she	felt	at	the
moment	of	making	this	picture	that	she	had	reached	the	culminating	point	of
her	life,	a	moment	of	great	liberation.
26
	Jung	associates	this	with	the	birth	of
the	self
27
	
and	indicates	that	the	patient	is	here	at	the	point	of	conscious
realization	of	the	self	when	“the	liberation	has	become	a	fact	that	is	integrated
into	consciousness.”
28
In	Picture	4	there	is	a	significant	change	in	the	sphere.	Now	there	is	some

differentiation:	it	is	divided	into	“an	outer	membrane	and	an	inner	nucleus.”
29
The	snake	that	was	floating	above	the	sphere	in	the	earlier	picture	is	now
penetrating	the	sphere	and	impregnating	it.	The	fourth	picture	deals	with
fecundation	and	employs	more	or	less	explicit	sexual	imagery.	She	has	put	her
male	identification	aside	and	is	opening	her	being	to	new	possibilities	for	life.
As	the	patient	and	Jung	interpret	this	picture,	it	comes	to	hold	an	impersonal
meaning	as	well:	the	ego	must	experience	“letting	go”	in	order	to	expand	the
horizon	to	include	positive	
and	negative	aspects	of	the	whole	personality
(shadow	integration).	The	union	of	snake	and	sphere	represent	a	union	of	the
psychic	opposites	in	the	patient’s	psyche.	Jung	avoids	the	concrete	sexual
transference	interpretations	that	could	so	easily	be	made	here	because	they
would	lead	into	sexual	reductionism	and	would	fail	to	advance	the
individuation	process.	The	suffering	the	patient	was	undergoing	here	was
precisely	letting	go	of	the	personalistic	interpretations,	namely	of	her	sexual
wishes	for	Jung	the	man,	and	realizing	instead	that	she	was	not	falling	in	love
with	her	analyst,	with	whom	she	had	become	so	psychologically	intimate,	but
that	an	archetypal	level	of	the	process	of	individuation	had	been	activated	and
this	was	at	work	beyond	their	personal	relationship.	It	was	the	self	in
operation,	emerging	through	this	imagery.
The	picture	series	now	takes	up	in	much	greater	depth	and	detail	the
problem	of	the	shadow	and	the	integration	of	good	and	evil.	In	Picture	5	evil
is	rejected,	and	the	serpent	is	placed	outside	the	sphere.	Picture	6	shows	an
attempt	to	unite	the	opposites	outside	and	inside,	a	movement	towards
conscious	realization.	Picture	7	indicates	some	depression	and	some	further
consciousness	as	a	result.	Picture	8,	which	is	very	important,	illustrates	a
movement	toward	the	earth,	the	mother,	the	feminine.	This	was	what	this
woman	came	to	Europe	for;	she	was	trying	to	make	firm	contact	with	the
feminine	side	of	her	being.	Picture	9	again	shows	her	struggle	with	uniting	the
opposites,	good	and	evil.	In	Picture	10,	the	opposites	are	balanced,	but	the
image	of	cancer	appears	for	the	first	time.	(This	women,	in	fact,	died	of
cancer	sixteen	years	later.)	Picture	11	suggests	that	the	rising	importance	of
the	outside	world	was	beginning	to	cloud	the	value	of	the	mandala.	From	here
on	the	theme	of	the	mandala	is	repeated	in	many	variants,	each	one
attempting	further	integration	and	expression	of	the	self.	The	series	concludes
with	Picture	19	initially,	but	then	the	woman	continues	for	ten	more	years
after	treatment	and	eventually	ends	with	Picture	24,	a	beautiful	white	lotus
image	with	a	yellow	center,	placed	inside	a	golden	circle	that	hangs	against	a
solid	black	background.	A	single	gold	star	sits	above	the	lotus.	The	lotus	itself
rests	on	a	bed	of	green	leaves,	and	below	the	leaves	are	what	appear	to	be	two

golden	serpents.	It	is	a	gorgeous	image	of	the	
self,	manifest	and	fully	realized.
Jung	declines	to	comment	on	the	images	beyond	Picture	19,	but	they	speak
for	themselves	of	a	further	deepening	and	consolidating	of	the	selfhood
uncovered	and	experienced	during	and	after	the	period	of	analysis.
Jung’s	concluding	statement	about	the	case	is	that	this	woman	was,	during
her	analysis,	in	the	early	stages	of	a	powerful	individuation	process.	During
the	time	he	saw	her	in	analysis,	she	experienced	the	never-to-be-forgotten
emergence	of	the	self	into	consciousness,	and	in	subsequent	weeks	and
months	she	struggled	to	unite	the	opposites	within	her	psychic	matrix.	She
was	able	to	disidentify	with	the	animus	and	to	reunite	with	the	feminine	core
of	herself.	Here	ego	became	relativized	vis-a-vis	the	self,	and	she	was	able	to
experience	the	impersonal	archetypal	psyche.	These	are	classic	features	of
what	he	would	call	the	process	of	individuation	in	the	second	half	of	life.
The	Movements	of	the	Self
Just	a	final	word	on	the	subject	of	individuation.	Jung’s	view	of	the	self	is
both	structural	and	dynamic.	In	the	previous	chapter,	I	focused	mostly	on	its
structural	features.	But	when	one	considers	the	process	of	individuation,	the
feature	that	comes	to	the	fore	is	its	dynamic	quality.	Jung	thinks	of	the	self	as
undergoing	continual	transformation	during	the	course	of	a	lifetime.	Each	of
the	archetypal	images	that	appear	in	the	developmental	sequence	from	birth	to
old	age—the	divine	infant,	the	hero,	the	puer	and	puella,	the	king	and	queen,
the	crone	and	the	wise	old	man—are	aspects	or	expressions	of	this	single
archetype.	Over	the	course	of	development,	the	self	impacts	the	psyche	and
creates	changes	in	the	individual	at	all	levels:	physical,	psychological,	and
spiritual.	The	individuation	process	is	driven	by	the	self	and	carried	out
through	the	mechanism	of	compensation.	While	the	ego	does	not	generate	it
or	control	it,	it	may	participate	in	this	process	by	becoming	aware	of	it.
At	the	end	of	his	late	work	
Aion,
	Jung	presents	a	diagram	to	illustrate	the
dynamic	movements	of	the	self.	The	diagram	looks	like	a	sort	of	carbon	atom.

This	represents	a	formula	for	the	transformation	of	a	single	entity,	the	self,
within	the	context	of	the	continuum	of	an	individual’s	psychological	life.	In
this	diagram,	Jung	is	attempting	to	portray	a	movement	within	the	self	from
pure	potential	to	actualization:	“The	process	depicted	by	our	formula	changes
the	originally	unconscious	totality	into	a	conscious	one.”
30
	Since	it	describes
a	continual	process	of	transformation	of	one	and	the	same	substance,	it	is	a
process	of	transformation	and	renewal	as	well	as	a	movement	towards
consciousness.
The	movement	starts	in	Quaternio	A,	which	represents	the	archetypal	level,
the	spirit	end	of	the	psychic	spectrum.	Here	it	manifests	as	an	ideal	image.	As
it	circulates	through	the	A	quaternio,	the	B	quaternio,	the	C	quaternio,	the	D
quaternio,	and	then	returns	to	A	to	repeat	again,	a	psychic	content,	an
archetypal	image,	enters	the	psychic	system	at	the	archetypal	end	of	the
spectrum	and	an	integration	process	ensues	on	each	of	the	other	three	levels.
First,	the	image	rotates	through	the	four	points	of	the	archetypal	quaternio,
and	the	idea	becomes	clearer.	Then	the	idea	shifts	to	level	B,	entering	through
the	doorway	of	small	b,	by	a	process	similar	to	shifting	an	energy	level	in	an
atom.	This	is	a	shift	to	another	level	of	consciousness.	Now	the	idea	exists	at
the	shadow	level,	and	here	it	enters	into	reality	and	everyday	life	where
objects	cast	shadows.	The	idea	acquires	substantiality,	and	the	idea	of	unity,
totality,	and	wholeness	now	must	be	lived	out	in	
life.	The	idea	works	its	way
through	this	psychic	level,	and	it	must	now	be	realized	concretely	in	space
and	time,	and	this	introduces	limitations	and	problems.	Jung	says	that	every
human	act	can	be	regarded	either	positively	or	negatively	
31
	and	when	moving
from	thought	to	action	one	is	entering	a	world	of	shadow	potential.	Every
action	leads	to	a	reaction.	It	has	an	external	impact,	and	so	when	someone
actually	begins	individuating,	making	changes	that	other	people	start
complaining	about,	this	person	is	moving	within	the	shadow	quaternio.	The
idea	is	materializing,	taking	effect	in	real-life	behavior,	and	reaching	down

into	the	instinctual	level.	Archetypes	and	instincts	are	becoming	connected	at
this	level,	and	as	the	idea	moves	into	the	Shadow	Quaternio,	it	takes	on	more
and	more	instinctual	and	embodied	attributes.
When	the	idea	descends	into	level	C,	it	reaches	the	level	of	physis,	which	is
extremely	deep	in	the	material	substrate	of	the	body,	and	the	body	itself
begins	to	change.	The	organizing	principle	that	begins	with	the	image	and
entering	the	psyche	becomes	behavior,	then	touches	on	and	constellates
instinct,	now	begins	to	effect	the	body	in	such	a	way	that	it	actually
rearranges	molecules.	This	deep	physical	level	lies	beyond	the	psychoid
barrier	of	the	psyche.	This	is	one	motive	force	behind	evolution	itself.
Structure	follows	form.
With	level	D,	the	energy	level	itself	is	reached.	Here	lies	the	origin	of	the
crystallization	energy	into	matter.	It	is	the	submolecular	and	subatomic	level
of	energy	and	the	forms	that	shape	it.	To	touch	this	level	is	to	imply	profound
change	indeed,	change	at	the	level	of	energy	itself	and	its	organization.
The	formula	presents	a	symbol	of	the	self,	for	the	self	is	not	just	a
static	quantity	or	constant	form,	but	is	also	a	dynamic	process.	In	the
same	way,	the	ancients	saw	the	imago	Dei	in	man	not	as	a	mere
imprint,	as	a	sort	of	lifeless,	stereotyped	impression,	but	as	an	active
force	…	The	four	transformations	represent	a	process	of	restoration	or
rejuvenation	taking	place,	as	it	were,	inside	the	self,	and	comparable
to	the	carbon-nitrogen	cycle	in	the	sun,	when	a	carbon	nucleus
captures	four	protons	…	and	releases	them	at	the	end	of	the	cycle	in
the	form	of	an	alpha	particle.	The	carbon	nucleus	itself	comes	out	of
the	reaction	unchanged,	‘like	the	Phoenix	from	the	ashes’.	The	secret
of	existence,	i.e.,	the	existence	of	the	atom	and	its	components,	may
well	consist	in	a	continually	repeated	process	of	rejuvenation,	and	one
comes	to	similar	conclusions	in	trying	to	account	for	the	numinosity	of
the	archetypes.
32
Anticipating	the	next	chapter,	we	can	think	of	the	self	as	a	cosmic	entity
that	emerges	in	human	life	and	renews	itself	endlessly	in	its	rotations	through
the	psyche.	Perhaps	it	relies	on	human	individuals	to	become	conscious	of
itself,	to	incarnate	in	the	three-dimensional	world	of	time	and	space,	and	also
to	rejuvenate	itself	and	extend	its	existence.	It	subsists	in	the	universe	beyond
the	psyche.	It	uses	our	psyches	and	the	material	world,	including	our	bodies,
for	its	own	purposes,	and	it	continues	after	we	grow	old	and	die.	We	provide	a
home	where	it	can	emerge	and	reside,	yet	in	our	pride	and	ego	inflation	we
take	far	too	much	credit	for	its	genius	and	beauty.

9
Of	Time	and	Eternity
(Synchronicity)
From	his	first	attempts	to	explore	the	human	soul	and	to	map	it	and	its
boundaries,	Jung	was	fascinated	by	what	happens	on	the	borders.	This	was	his
temperament—he	loved	to	push	at	the	edges	of	the	already	known.	His	first
major	study	was	a	dissertation	on	mediumistic	trances	and	the	wondrous
accounts	of	long-dead	personages	by	his	young	cousin,	Helene	Preiswerk.
This	was	a	psychological	investigation	of	the	relation	between	normal	and
paranormal	states	of	consciousness.
1
	Subsequent	works	on	word	association
and	the	theory	of	complexes	studied	the	boundaries	between	conscious	and
unconscious	parts	of	the	psyche.	Pressing	further	into	the	territory	of	the
unconscious,	Jung	found	another	borderland.	This	one	lay	between	personal
and	impersonal	contents	of	the	unconscious,	between	the	territory	of	the
complexes	and	that	of	the	archetypal	image-and-instinct	combinations.	In	his
consequent	investigations	of	the	self,	he	found	a	point	of	transgression	at	the
boundary	between	psyche	and	nonpsyche.	Since	the	archetype	
per	se
	is
psychoid	and	does	not	strictly	belong	within	the	confines	of	the	psyche’s
boundaries,	it	bridges	between	inner	and	outer	worlds	and	breaks	down	the
subject-object	dichotomy.
Ultimately	this	curiosity	about	boundaries	led	Jung	to	state	a	theory	that
attempts	to	articulate	a	single	unified	system	which	embraces	both	matter	and
spirit	and	throws	a	bridge	between	time	and	eternity.	This	is	the	theory	of
synchronicity.
	An	extension	of	the	theory	of	the	self	into	cosmology,
synchronicity	speaks	of	the	profound	hidden	order	and	unity	among	all	that
exists.	This	theory	also	unveils	Jung	the	metaphysician,	an	identity	he	often

denied.
Patterns	in	Chaos
Jung’s	few	writings	about	synchronicity	explore	the	meaningful	order	in
seemingly	random	events.	He	notes—as	many	others	have	too—that	psychic
images	and	objective	events	are	sometimes	arranged	in	definite	patterns,	and
this	arrangement	occurs	by	chance	and	not	by	virtue	of	a	causal	chain	of
preceding	events.	In	other	words,	there	is	no	causal	reason	for	the	pattern	to
appear.	It	comes	about	purely	by	chance.	So	the	question	arises:	Is	this	chance
event	of	patterning	completely	random	or	is	it	meaningful?	Divination
follows	this	idea	that	certain	chance	events	have	meaning.	A	certain	bird	flies
overhead,	and	the	soothsayer	tells	the	king	that	the	time	is	right	to	set	out	for
battle.	Or	there	is	the	more	complicated	case	of	the	ancient	Chinese	oracle
called	
I	Ching	or	The	Book	of	Changes.
	This	oracle	is	consulted	by	throwing
coins	or	yarrow	stalks	to	determine	a	pattern	of	numbers	that	is	then	related	to
one	of	sixty-four	hexagrams.	By	studying	that	hexagram,	one	can	determine	a
pattern	of	meaning	in	events	of	the	present	moment	and	an	emergent	pattern
that	will	take	shape	in	the	future.	From	this	one	can	take	counsel.	This	oracle
is	based	on	the	principle	of	synchronicity.	The	assumption	is	that	there	is	a
meaningful	order	behind	the	chance	outcome	of	coin	tossing,	a	burning
question,	and	events	in	the	external	world.	People	who	try	the	
I	Ching
	are
often	surprised	by	its	uncanny	accuracy.	How	can	one	explain	these
meaningful	arrangements	and	patterns	that	are	not	created	by	known	causes?
Even	closer	to	Jung’s	analytic	practice	and	psychological	theory	is	a
phenomenon	he	notes	with	fascination,	namely	that	psychological
compensation	occurs	not	only	in	dreams	but	also	in	nonpsychologically
controlled	events.	Sometimes	compensation	arrives	from	the	outside	world.	A
patient	of	Jung’s	had	a	dream	of	a	golden	scarab	beetle.	While	discussing	this
dream	symbol	in	his	study,	they	heard	a	sound	at	the	window	and	found	that	a
local	Swiss	version	of	this	beetle	
(Cetonia	aurate)
	was	trying	to	get	into	the
room.
2
	From	instances	like	this,	one	infers	that	the	appearance	of	archetypal
images	in	dreams	may	coincide	with	other	events.	The	compensatory
phenomena	cross	over	the	commonly	accepted	boundaries	between	subject
and	object	and	manifest	in	the	object	world.	Again,	the	puzzle	for	Jung	was
how	to	account	for	this	in	his	theory.	Strictly	speaking	such	events	are	not
psychological,	and	yet	they	have	a	deep	connection	to	psychological	life.

Archetypes,	he	concludes,	are	
transgressive,
3
	that	is	they	are	not	limited	to	the
psychic	realm.	In	their	transgressivity,	they	can	emerge	into	consciousness
either	from	within	the	psychic	matrix	or	from	the	world	about	us	or	both	at
once.	When	both	happen	at	the	same	time,	it	is	called	synchronistic.
References	to	the	
unus	mundus
	(the	unified	cosmos)	and	to	the	notion	(if
not	the	exact	term)	of	synchronicity	are	scattered	throughout	the	
Collected
Works
	and	in	other	less	formal	writings	like	letters,	but	Jung	did	not	express
his	thoughts	fully	on	this	subject	until	fairly	late	in	life.	In	1952,	he	and	the
Nobel	Prize-winning	physicist	Wolfgang	Pauli	jointly	published
Naturerkldrung	und	Psyche
,	(translated	into	English	as	
The	Interpretation	of
Nature	and	the	Psyche
),	which	was	an	attempt	to	elucidate	the	possible
relations	between	nature	and	psyche.	It	was	significant	that	Jung	published
this	work	with	a	Nobel	Prize-winning	scientist	and	not	with	a	philosopher,	a
theologian,	or	a	mythologist.	Of	all	of	Jung’s	theoretical	work,	this	piece	on
synchronicity	is	subject	to	the	most	gross	distortion.	Jung	wanted	to	avoid
being	seen	as	a	mystic	or	a	crank,	and	it	is	clear	that	he	worried	especially
about	exposing	this	part	of	his	thinking	to	the	eyes	of	the	scientific,	modern
public.	Pauli’s	essay,	“The	Influence	of	Archetypal	Ideas	on	the	Expression	of
Scientific	Theories	of	Kepler,”	investigates	
the	archetypal	patterns	in	Kepler’s
scientific	thought	and	in	a	sense	prepares	the	way	for	Jung’s	more
adventuresome	contribution,	the	essay	“Synchronicity:	An	Acausal
Connecting	Principle.”
4
	
This	work	on	synchronicity	adds	to	Jung’s
psychological	theory	the	notion	that	a	high	degree	of	continuity	exists
between	psyche	and	world,	such	that	psychic	images	(which	also	include	the
kernels	of	abstract	scientific	thoughts,	like	those	of	Kepler)	may	also	reveal
truths	about	reality	in	the	reflective	mirror	of	human	consciousness.	The
psyche	is	not	something	that	plays	itself	out	in	human	beings	only	and	in
isolation	from	the	cosmos.	There	is	a	dimension	in	which	psyche	and	world
intimately	interact	with	and	reflect	one	another.	This	is	Jung’s	thesis.
Developing	the	Idea	of	Synchronicity
In	a	letter	to	Carl	Seelig,	the	Swiss	author	and	journalist	who	wrote	a
biography	of	Albert	Einstein,	Jung	writes	about	his	first	inkling	of
synchronicity:
Professor	Einstein	was	my	guest	on	several	occasions	at	dinner	…

These	were	very	early	days	when	Einstein	was	developing	his	first
theory	of	relativity.	He	tried	to	instill	into	us	the	elements	of	it,	more
or	less	successfully.	As	non-mathematicians	we	psychiatrists	had
difficulty	in	following	his	argument.	Even	so,	I	understood	enough	to
form	a	powerful	impression	of	him.	It	was	above	all	the	simplicity	and
directness	of	his	genius	as	a	thinker	that	impressed	me	mightily	and
exerted	a	lasting	influence	on	my	own	intellectual	work.	It	was
Einstein	who	first	started	me	on	thinking	about	a	possible	relativity	of
time	as	well	as	space,	and	their	psychic	conditionality.	More	than
thirty	years	later	this	stimulus	led	to	my	relation	with	the	physicist
Professor	W.	Pauli	and	to	my	thesis	of	psychic	synchronicity.
5
Einstein’s	theory	of	relativity	must	have	captured	Jung’s	imagination	even	if
he	did	not	understand	the	details	of	it	or	the	mathematical	proofs	for	it.	It	is
interesting	to	note,	too,	that	famous	physicists	played	a	part	in	this	theorizing
at	its	beginning	and	the	conclusion.	This	association	to	modern	physics	gives
the	proper	historical	context	for	Jung’s	theory	of	synchronicity.
The	relationship	between	Jung	and	the	luminaries	of	modern	physics	is	a
story	that	has	yet	to	be	told	fully.	In	addition	to	
Einstein	and	Pauli,	there	were
also	many	other	significant	figures	in	modern	physics	who	inhabited	Zurich	in
the	first	half	of	the	twentieth	century	and	gave	lectures	or	taught	at	the
Polytechnic	University	where	Jung	was	a	professor	of	psychology	in	the
1930s.	Zurich	was	a	veritable	hotbed	of	modern	physics	in	the	first	half	of	this
century,	and	it	would	have	been	nearly	impossible	to	ignore	the	stimulating
ferment	these	intellects	created.	There	was	a	definite	impression	afoot	that	the
nature	of	physical	reality	was	being	fundamentally	rethought,	and	Jung	early
on—as	indicated	by	his	letter	about	Einstein—began	thinking	about	the
similarities	between	modern	physics	and	analytical	psychology.	Jung’s	essay
on	synchronicity	was	doubtless	the	result	of	countless	discussions	with	these
people	during	the	thirty	or	more	years	preceding	its	final	form	and
publication.
It	must	be	recognized	that	the	theory	of	archetypes	and	the	self	and	the
theory	of	synchronicity	were	combined	to	weave	a	single	fabric	of	thought.
This	is	Jung’s	unified	vision	referred	to	in	the	Introduction	of	this	book.	To
grasp	the	full	scope	of	the	theory	of	the	self,	one	must	consider	it	within	the
context	of	Jung’s	thinking	on	synchronicity;	to	grasp	his	theory	of
synchronicity	one	must	also	know	about	his	theory	of	archetypes.	This	is	one
reason	why	few	other	psychologists	have	followed	Jung’s	lead	into	the	theory
of	archetypes.	It	becomes	metapsychological	to	the	point	of	metaphysics,	and
few	psychologists	feel	comfortable	in	all	the	areas	required	to	embrace	this

full	theory—psychology,	physics,	and	metaphysics.	It	is	an	intellectual	range
that	few	modern	thinkers	can	hope	to	match.	Academics	are	especially	shy	of
stepping	beyond	the	confines	of	their	departmental	specialty.	The	theory	of
synchronicity	lends	to	Jung’s	view	of	the	self	as	a	feature	of	radical
transcendence	over	consciousness	and	the	psyche	as	a	whole,	and	it
challenges	the	common	boundarylines	drawn	to	separate	the	faculties	of
psychology,	physics,	biology,	philosophy,	and	spirituality.	Psychology	is
traditionally	supposed	to	limit	itself	to	what	goes	on	in	the	human	mind;	but
with	his	theory	of	the	self	and	synchronicity,	Jung’s	analytical	psychology
challenged	this	arbitrary	segmentation.	When	Jung	was	once	asked	by
students	where	the	self	ends	and	what	its	boundaries	are,	his	reply	is	supposed
to	
have	been	that	it	has	no	end,	it	is	unbounded.	To	understand	what	he	meant
by	this	remark,	one	must	realize	that	he	was	considering	the	implications	of
synchronicity	for	the	theory	of	the	self.
Jung	was	understandably	ambivalent	about	putting	forward	an	idea	of	the
magnitude	that	synchronicity	entails.	Ever	the	cautious	and	conservative
Swiss,	Jung	tried	generally	to	rest	his	case	on	purely	psychological
arguments,	his	area	of	undisputed	expertise.	With	the	theory	of	synchronicity,
however,	he	went	out	on	a	limb.	Here	the	psyche	by	itself	would	not	support
him.	Nevertheless	at	the	age	of	seventy-five,	he	must	have	felt	he	had	earned
the	right	to	indulge	himself	in	this	kind	of	cosmological	speculation.	He	was
ready	to	go	into	print	with	one	of	his	wildest	notions,	the	unity	of	the	self	and
Being.	Is	this	so	different	from	saying	that	the	self	and	God	are	one?	He	took
the	risk	of	sounding	like	a	prophet,	or	worse	yet,	a	crank.
Synchronicity	and	Causality
The	essay	itself	is	difficult	and	certainly	deeply	flawed	by	a	misguided	effort
at	statistical	analysis	of	a	piece	of	research	carried	out	on	married	couples	by
a	colleague.	In	my	review	of	this	work,	I	will	limit	myself	to	the	theoretical
sections.	Jung	begins	by	commenting	on	the	notion	of	causality	and	the	laws
of	probability,	and	he	notes	the	universal	human	tendency	to	project	causality.
Almost	inevitably	people	ask	the	question,	Why	did	it	happen?	One	assumes
that	every	event	is	caused	by	something	that	preceded	it.	Often	a	causal
relation	of	this	sort	is	present,	yet	occasionally	it	may	not	be.	In	psychology,
for	instance,	causality	is	particularly	difficult	to	ascertain	because	nobody	can
know	for	certain	what	causes	us	to	do,	think,	and	feel	as	we	do.	There	is

conscious	motivation,	and	there	is	unconscious	motivation	of	psychic
contents	and	impulses.	There	are	many	theories	that	try	to	explain	emotion
and	behavior	causally,	but	our	projections	undoubtedly	lead	us	to	find	more
causation	in	the	realm	of	psychological	phenomena	than	is	really	there.	Or	we
may	attribute	events	to	the	wrong	causes,	finding	out	later	that	we	were
mistaken.
We	might	jump	to	the	conclusion	that	a	man	beats	his	wife	because	he	was
beaten	as	a	child	or	because	he	saw	his	father	beating	his	mother	regularly.	He
behaves	this	way	because	of	childhood	experiences,	or	because	his	parents
influenced	him	in	that	direction.	He	“takes	after	his	father,”	or	“his	mother
complex”	is	responsible,	we	might	say	with	great	confidence	in	our
psychological	acuity.	This	may	be	a	good	first	approximation,	but	such
reductive	analyses	surely	do	not	exhaust	the	full	range	of	possible	causes	and
meanings.	There	is	also	a	final	cause,	for	instance,	which	leads	people	to	do
something	in	order	to	achieve	a	goal	or	to	gain	some	measure	of	adaptation	to
life.	Perhaps	this	man	is	trying	to	gain	power	and	control	over	his	wife,
intending	by	that	to	achieve	more	mastery	over	his	own	future.	Psychological
causation	can	lead	backwards	into	history	or	equally	well	forward	into	the
future.	And	then	there	are	the	chance	events,	being	in	the	right	place	at	the
right	time.	It’s	hard	to	explain	why	some	people	are	so	lucky	or	unlucky,	and
we	often	end	up	praising	them	for	the	things	they	did	not	do	and	blaming
them	for	the	things	they	could	not	avoid.	There	is	almost	infinite	space	for
projection	and	speculation.
We	think	in	cause-and-effect	terms	because	we	are	human,	not	because	we
live	in	a	scientific	age.	In	every	period	and	every	culture,	people	think
causally,	even	if	they	assign	causes	to	events	that	our	scientific	knowledge
contradicts.	Today	we	might	say	that	someone	is	a	psychopathic	monster
because	he	was	severely	abused	as	a	child,	while	in	the	Middle	Ages	the	view
was	that	the	Devil	made	him	do	it.	Different	reasons	are	given,	but	the
thinking	is	the	same.	To	challenge	causal	thinking	itself,	Jung	recognizes,	is	to
go	against	the	grain	of	common	sense.	So	why	do	it?	Because	there	are	events
that	cannot	be	covered	by	all	the	theories	of	causality.
In	questioning	the	ultimacy	of	cause-and-effect	reasoning,	Jung	discovered
that	modern	physics	was	an	ally,	for	physics	had	discovered	some	events	and
processes	for	which	there	are	no	causal	explanations,	only	statistical
probabilities.	Jung	mentions,	for	example,	the	decay	of	radioactive	elements.
There	is	no	causal	explanation	for	why	one	or	another	specific	radium	atom
decomposes	when	it	does.	The	decay	of	radioactive	elements	can	be	predicted
and	measured	statistically,	and	the	rate	of	decay	is	steady	over	time,	but	there

is	no	explanation	for	why	it	happens	when	and	as	it	does.	It	just	happens.	It’s
a	“just	so”	thing.	This	discovery	of	an	uncaused	event	opens	a	gap	in	the
causal	universe.	It	is	not	only	that	science	has	not	yet	figured	out	how
causality	works	here,	but	rather	that	in	principle	the	rule	of	causation	does	not
apply.	If	there	are	events	that	are	not	created	by	a	preceding	cause,	how	can
we	think	about	their	origins?	Why	do	they	happen?	What	accounts	for	their
occurrence?	Are	these	events	random	and	purely	accidental?
Jung	recognizes	probability	as	an	important	factor	in	accounting	for	many
events.	But	there	are	series	of	apparently	random	events	that	show	a	pattern
beyond	the	scales	of	probability,	such	as	runs	of	numbers	or	other
extraordinary	coincidences.	Gamblers	live	and	pray	for	these	runs	of	luck	that
cannot	be	explained.	Jung	wants	to	stay	away	from	highly	intuitive	or	occult
concepts	like	elective	affinities	or	correspondences,	which	have	been
proposed	by	some	seers	and	visionary	philosophers	such	as	Schopenhauer.
Instead	he	prefers	to	approach	this	difficult	subject	scientifically,	empirically,
and	rationally,	just	as	many	years	earlier	he	had	tackled	the	mystery	of	occult
mediumship	empirically	and	scientifically	in	his	doctoral	dissertation.	Jung
was	thoroughly	committed	to	a	scientific	approach	to	understanding.
It	is	tempting	to	read	Jung’s	work	on	synchronicity,	however,	in	more
biographical	terms.	In	his	views	about	individuation	in	the	second	half	of	life,
Jung	holds	that	people	(in	the	Western	world,	at	least)	should	try	to	bring	their
rational	ego-consciousness	into	contact	with	the	non-rational	collective
unconscious	while	not	sacrificing	the	ego’s	rational	position.	Jung	also
believed	that	the	major	psychological	task	in	the	second	half	of	life	is	to
formulate	a	
Weltanschauung
	or	worldview,	a	personal	philosophy	of	life.	And
this	should	include	both	rational	and	irrational	elements.	In	this	essay	on
synchronicity	we	can	see	Jung	using	his	rational	Western	scientific	ego	to
explore	the	world	of	magic	and	the	rare,	inexplicable	phenomena	that	occur	in
the	collective	unconscious.	He	is	trying	to	formulate	a	symbol,	in	the	form	of
a	concept,	that	can	
hold	the	two	realms	together	in	a	tension	of	opposites.
While	the	issues	he	is	dealing	with	here	are	similar	to	those	often	taken	up	in
religion	and	philosophy,	Jung	is	trying	to	bring	his	scientific	rational	method
and	worldview	to	bear	upon	phenomena	whose	mystical,	religious,	and	quasi-
magical	nature	usually	excludes	them	from	scientific	discussion.	For	his	own
personal	reasons,	but	also	for	our	scientific	culture	as	a	whole,	he	is	trying	to
forge	a	link	between	the	two	dominant	cultural	foci	of	the	West,	science	and
religion.	He	is	trying	to	hold	this	tension	without	one-sidedly	favoring	either
element.	His	theory	of	synchronicity	is	the	symbol	that	will	attempt	to	contain
this	pair	of	opposites.	This	is	the	personal	piece	of	this	work.

Jung	was	fascinated	with	J.	B.	Rhine’s	experiments	in	extrasensory
perception	(ESP)	at	Duke	University.	He	was	impressed	because	they
demonstrated,	using	probability	theory,	that	ESP	cannot	be	explained	causally.
The	experiments	showed	that	humans	can	cross	the	seemingly	absolute
boundaries	that	limit	us	to	a	single	time-space	continuum.	This	reminded	Jung
of	Einstein’s	theory	of	relativity	and	also	of	dreams	he	had	observed	where
distant	events	were	imaged	during	or	before	they	took	place.	Rhine’s
experiments	offered	new	empirical	evidence	for	what	Jung	had	already
concluded,	namely	that	the	psyche	is	not	limited	absolutely	by	the	boundaries
of	time	and	space.	Causality,	which	assumes	an	absolutely	sealed	time-and-
space	continuum,	cannot	explain	these	events.	Jung	indicates	that	no	energy	is
transmitted	in	Rhine’s	ESP	experiments;	there	is	only	a	“falling	together”	in
time	of	thought	and	event.	A	card	is	turned	over	in	one	room,	an	image
appears	in	a	person’s	psyche	in	another	room,	and	these	coincide	more	often
than	is	statistically	probable.	Jung	uses	the	term	“synchronicity”	in	print	for
the	first	time	in	this	essay:	“it	cannot	be	a	question	of	cause	and	effect,	but	of
a	falling	together	in	time,	a	kind	of	simultaneity.	Because	of	this	quality	of
simultaneity,	I	have	picked	the	term	‘synchronicity’	to	designate	a
hypothetical	factor	equal	in	rank	to	causality	as	a	principle	of	explanation.”
6
Synchronicity	and	Archetypal	Theory
In	1954,	two	years	after	the	appearance	of	the	synchronicity	essay,	Jung
published	a	revised	version	of	his	definitive	theoretical	paper	“On	the	Nature
of	the	Psyche.”	In	a	major	supplement,	he	links	the	theory	of	archetypes	to	the
principle	of	synchronicity.	This	is	important	because	it	ties	these	two	pieces	of
his	thinking	together	and	forms	a	single	unified	theoretical	statement.	Jung
uses	the	phrase	“objective	psyche”	to	discuss	the	view	that	the	unconscious	is
a	realm	of	“objects”	(complexes	and	archetypal	images)	as	much	as	the
surrounding	world	is	a	realm	of	persons	and	things.	These	inner	objects
impinge	on	consciousness	in	the	same	way	that	external	objects	do.	They	are
not	part	of	the	ego,	but	they	affect	the	ego,	and	the	ego	must	relate	and	adapt
to	them.	Thoughts,	for	instance,	occur	to	us,	they	“fall	into”	our
consciousness	(in	German,	
Einfall,
	literally	something	that	“falls	into”
consciousness,	but	also	an	“inspiration”).	For	Jung,	the	intuitions	and
thoughts	that	appear	from	the	unconscious	and	are	not	the	products	of
deliberate	efforts	to	think	but	are	inner	objects,	bits	of	the	unconscious	that

land	on	the	surface	of	the	ego	occasionally.	(Jung	sometimes	liked	to	say	that
thoughts	are	like	birds:	They	come	and	nest	in	the	trees	of	consciousness	for	a
little	while	and	then	they	fly	away.	They	are	forgotten	and	disappear.)	The
deeper	one	goes	into	the	objective	psyche,	moreover,	the	more	objective	it
becomes	because	it	is	less	and	less	related	to	the	ego’s	subjectivity:	“It	is,	at
one	and	the	same	time,	absolute	subjectivity	and	universal	truth,	for	in
principle	it	can	be	shown	to	be	present	everywhere,	which	certainly	cannot	be
said	of	conscious	contents	of	a	personalistic	nature.	The	elusiveness,
capriciousness,	haziness,	and	uniqueness	that	the	lay	mind	always	associates
with	the	idea	of	the	psyche	applies	only	to	consciousness	and	not	to	the
absolute	unconscious.”
7
	Unlike	consciousness,	the	unconscious	is	regular,
predictable,	and	collective.	“The	qualitatively	rather	than	quantitatively
definable	units	with	which	the	unconscious	works,	namely	the	archetypes,
therefore	have	a	nature	that	
cannot	with	certainty	be	designated	as	psychic”
8
(Jung’s	italics).
In	earlier	chapters	I	noted	that	the	archetypes	are	to	be	considered	psychoid
rather	than	purely	psychic.	In	this	passage	Jung	
states	this	explicitly:
“Although	I	have	been	led	by	purely	psychological	considerations	to	doubt
the	exclusively	psychic	nature	of	the	archetypes,	psychology	sees	itself
obliged	to	revise	its	‘only	psychic’	assumptions	in	the	light	of	the	physical
findings	too	…	The	relative	or	partial	identity	of	psyche	and	physical
continuum	is	of	the	greatest	importance	theoretically,	because	it	brings	with	it
a	tremendous	simplification	by	bridging	over	the	seeming
incommensurability	between	the	physical	world	and	the	psychic,	not	of
course	in	any	concrete	way,	but	from	the	physical	side	by	means	of
mathematical	equations,	and	from	the	psychological	side	by	means	of
empirically	derived	postulates—archetypes—whose	content,	if	any,	cannot	be
represented	to	the	mind.”
9
	In	other	words,	Jung	sees	large	areas	of	identity
between	the	deepest	patterns	of	the	psyche	(archetypal	images)	and	the
processes	and	patterns	evident	in	the	physical	world	and	studied	by	physicists.
So,	ironically	enough,	it	turns	out	that	the	
participation	mystique
	
of	first
stage,	primitive	psychology	is	not	so	far	from	reality	after	all!	The	psyche,
defined	by	Jung	as	whatever	contents	or	perceptions	are	capable	in	principle
of	becoming	conscious	and	being	affected	by	the	will,	includes	ego-
consciousness,	complexes,	archetypal	images,	and	representations	of	instincts.
But	archetype	and	instinct	per	se	are	no	longer	psychic.	They	lie	on	a
continuum	with	the	physical	world,	which	at	its	depths	(as	explored	by
modern	physics)	is	as	mysterious	and	“spiritual”	as	the	psyche.	Both	dissolve
into	pure	energy.	This	point	is	important	because	it	suggests	a	way	to

conceive	of	how	the	psyche	is	related	to	soma	and	to	the	physical	world.	The
two	realms,	psyche	and	the	material	world,	can	be	bridged	by	mathematical
equations	and	by	“empirically	derived	postulates—archetypes.”
10
	Neither	the
material	body	nor	the	psyche	need	be	derived	from	the	other.	They	are	two
parallel	realities,	rather,	that	are	synchronistically	related	and	coordinated.
Mind	and	Matter
The	relation	of	mind	to	matter	intrigued	Jung	endlessly.	He	thought	it	very
curious	for	instance	that,	on	the	basis	of	mathematical	thought	alone,	a	bridge
could	be	built	that	would	stand	up	
to	the	rigors	of	nature	and	human	traffic.
Mathematics	is	a	pure	product	of	the	mind	and	appears	nowhere	in	the	natural
world,	yet	people	can	sit	in	their	studies	and	generate	equations	that	will
accurately	predict	and	capture	physical	objects	and	events.	Jung	was
impressed	that	a	purely	psychic	product	(a	mathematical	formula)	could	bear
such	a	remarkable	relationship	to	the	physical	world.	On	the	other	side,	Jung
proposes	that	the	archetypes	also	serve	as	direct	links	between	the	psyche	and
the	physical	world:	“Only	when	it	comes	to	explaining	psychic	phenomena	of
a	minimal	degree	of	clarity	are	we	driven	to	assume	that	archetypes	must	have
a	non-psychic	aspect.	Grounds	for	such	a	conclusion	are	supplied	by	the
phenomena	of	synchronicity,	which	are	associated	with	the	activity	of
unconscious	operators	and	have	hitherto	been	regarded,	or	repudiated,	as
‘telepathy’,	etc.”
11
	Jung	is	generally	cautious	about	ascribing	causality	to	the
archetypes	in	connection	with	synchronistic	phenomena	(otherwise	he	would
fall	back	into	a	model	of	causality,	with	the	archetypes	being	the	causes	of
synchronistic	events),	but	in	this	passage	he	does	seem	to	connect	them	to
“operators”	that	organize	synchronicity.
Synchronicity	is	defined	as	a	meaningful	coincidence	between	psychic	and
physical	events.	A	dream	of	a	plane	falling	out	of	the	sky	is	mirrored	the	next
morning	in	a	radio	report.	No	known	causal	connection	exists	between	the
dream	and	the	plane	crash.	Jung	posits	that	such	coincidences	rest	on
organizers	that	generate	psychic	images	on	one	side	and	physical	events	on
the	other.	The	two	occur	at	approximately	the	same	time,	and	the	link	between
them	is	not	causal.	Anticipating	his	critics,	Jung	writes:	“Skepticism	should
…	be	leveled	only	at	incorrect	theories	and	not	at	facts	which	exist	in	their
own	right.	No	unbiased	observer	can	deny	them.	Resistance	to	the	recognition
of	such	facts	rests	principally	on	the	repugnance	people	feel	for	an	allegedly

supernatural	faculty	tacked	on	to	the	psyche,	like	‘clairvoyance’.	The	very
diverse	and	confusing	aspects	of	these	phenomena	are,	so	far	as	I	can	see	at
present,	completely	explicable	on	the	assumption	of	a	psychically	relative
space-time	continuum.	As	soon	as	a	psychic	content	crosses	the	threshold	of
consciousness,	the	synchronistic	
marginal	phenomena	disappear,	time	and
space	resume	their	accustomed	sway,	and	consciousness	is	once	more	isolated
in	its	subjectivity.”
12
Synchronistic	phenomena	appear	most	often	when	the	psyche	is	operating
at	a	less	conscious	level,	as	in	dreaming	or	musing.	A	state	of	reverie	is	ideal.
As	soon	as	one	becomes	aware	and	focuses	on	the	synchronistic	event,	time
and	space	categories	resume	their	sway.	Jung	concluded	that	the	subjects	in
the	Rhine	experiments	must	have	dimmed	their	consciousness	as	they	became
interested	and	excited	by	the	project.	Had	they	tried	using	their	rational	egos
to	figure	out	probabilities,	their	ESP	results	would	have	dropped,	for	as	soon
as	cognitive	functioning	takes	over,	the	door	closes	to	synchronistic
phenomena.	Jung	points	out,	too,	that	synchronicity	seems	to	depend	greatly
on	the	presence	of	affectivity,	that	is,	sensitivity	to	emotional	stimuli.
In	his	writings,	Jung	offers	both	a	narrow	and	a	broad	definition	of
synchronicity
.
	The	narrow	definition	is	“the	simultaneous	occurrence	of	a
certain	psychic	state	with	one	or	more	external	events	which	appear	as
meaningful	parallels	to	the	momentary	subjective	state.”
13
	By	“simultaneous”
he	means	an	occurrence	in	about	the	same	time	frame,	within	hours	or	days,
but	not	necessarily	at	exactly	the	same	moment.	There	is	simply	a	“falling
together	in	time”	of	two	events,	one	psychic	and	the	other	physical.	On	the
psychic	side,	it	could	be	a	dream	image	or	a	thought	or	intuition.	(This
mysterious	correlation	between	psyche	and	the	object	world	is	the	more
narrow	definition	of	synchronicity.	There	will	be	a	more	general	definition
later	in	this	essay.)
Often	synchronicity	occurs,	as	noted	above,	when	a	person	is	psychically	in
an	
abaissement	du	niveau	mental
	(a	lower	level	of	conscious	awareness,	a	sort
of	dimming	of	consciousness)	and	the	level	of	consciousness	has	dropped	into
what	is	today	called	an	alpha	state.	This	means	also	that	the	unconscious	is
more	energized	than	consciousness,	and	complexes	and	archetypes	are
aroused	into	a	more	activated	state	and	can	push	over	the	threshold	into
consciousness.	It	is	possible	that	this	psychic	material	corresponds	to
objective	data	outside	the	psyche.

Absolute	Knowledge
One	intuitive	leap	that	Jung	makes,	which	is	nevertheless	based	on	a	good
deal	of	confirming	evidence	in	his	experience,	is	that	the	unconscious
possesses	what	he	calls	a	priori	knowledge:	“How	could	an	event	remote	in
space	and	time	produce	a	corresponding	psychic	image	when	the	transmission
of	energy	necessary	for	this	is	not	even	thinkable?	However	incomprehensible
it	may	appear,	we	are	finally	compelled	to	assume	that	there	is	in	the
unconscious	something	like	an	a	priori	knowledge	or	an	‘immediacy’	of
events	which	lacks	any	causal	basis.”
14
	This	would	allow	for	the	possibility
that	intuitively	we	can	know	things	that	we	have	no	rational	way	of	knowing.
Deep	intuition	can	provide	knowledge	that	is	indeed	really	true	and	not	just
speculation,	guesswork	or	fantasy.	For	Jung,	the	unconscious	defies	the
Kantian	categories	of	knowledge	and	surpasses	consciousness	in	the	range	of
possible	knowing.	In	other	words,	in	the	unconscious	we	know	many	things
that	we	do	not	know	that	we	know.	These	could	be	called	unthought	thoughts
or	unconscious	a	priori	knowledge.	It	is	this	notion	that	takes	Jung	into	the
furthest	reaches	of	his	speculations	about	the	unity	of	psyche	and	world.	If	we
know	things	that	are	beyond	our	conscious	possibility	of	knowing,	there	is
also	an	unknown	knower	in	us,	an	aspect	of	the	psyche	that	transcends	the
categories	of	time	and	space	and	is	simultaneously	present	here	and	there,
now	and	then.	This	would	be	the	self.
Jungians	sometimes	comment	that	in	the	unconscious	there	are	no	secrets:
Everybody	knows	everything.	This	is	a	way	of	talking	about	this	level	of
psychic	reality.	Even	putting	aside	for	the	moment	the	people	who	are
extraordinarily	gifted	in	intuition—like	some	medical	intuitives	who	have
proven	an	amazing	rate	of	accuracy	in	diagnosis	of	people	they	have	never
known	or	seen—many	people	have	the	experience	of	dreaming	about	others
in	a	way	that	gives	them	information	to	which	they	do	not	have	conscious
access.	Of	course	they	might	not	know	that	a	particular	dream	is	accurate.
Sometimes	we	dream	other	peoples’	dreams.	Sometimes	other	people	dream
our	reality.	As	an	analyst	who	hears	a	lot	of	transference	dreams,	I	can	verify
that	some	of	them	
(not	by	any	means	all)	are	accurate	far	beyond	the	amount
of	knowledge	my	patients	consciously	have	about	me.	Once	a	patient’s	dream
even	told	me	something	about	myself	that	I	did	not	know	consciously	at	the
time.	She	dreamed	that	I	was	exhausted	and	needed	a	rest.	I	was	not	aware	of
this	until	I	took	time	to	reflect,	and	then	coming	down	with	a	case	of	flu
shortly	thereafter,	I	realized	that	her	unconscious	had	picked	up	my	physical

condition	more	accurately	than	even	I	could	read	with	my	own	consciousness.
One	can	compare	this	unconscious	knower	in	people	to	the	Eye	of	God,	a
notion	that	nuns	formerly	used	to	scare	schoolchildren	in	their	attempt	to
induce	strict	obedience	to	the	church’s	teaching.	It	is	not	only	what	you	do	but
even	what	you	think—in	fact,	it	is	what	you	
are
—that	God	sees	and	keeps	a
running	account	of.	This	is	a	projective	version	of	the	same	idea	that	some
kind	of	absolute	knowledge	exists	in	the	unconscious.
To	think	about	this	issue	of	a	priori	knowledge	further,	Jung	considers	the
psychological	meaning	of	numbers.	What	are	they?	Suppose	that	we	“define
number	psychologically	as	an	archetype	of	order	which	has	become
conscious.”
15
	There	are,	of	course,	ancient	views	that	cosmic	structures	of
being	are	based	on	numbers	and	on	the	relations	of	numbers	to	one	another.
Pythagorean	doctrines,	for	instance,	taught	such	views.	Jung	takes	a	similar
approach,	only	with	more	modern	notions	of	mathematics	as	fundamental
structures	of	psyche	and	world.	When	these	basic	structures	of	being	are
imaged	in	the	psyche,	they	come	up	as	circles	(mandalas)	and	squares
(quaternities)	typically,	to	which	the	numbers	one	and	four	are	related.	The
movement	from	one	(the	beginning),	through	the	intervening	numbers	two
and	three,	to	the	number	four	(completion,	wholeness)	symbolizes	a	passage
from	primal	(but	still	only	potential)	unity	to	a	state	of	actual	wholeness.
Numbers	symbolize	the	structure	of	individuation	in	the	psyche,	and	they	also
symbolize	the	creation	of	order	in	the	non-psychic	world.	So	human
knowledge	of	numbers	becomes	knowledge	of	cosmic	structure.	Insofar	as
people	have	a	priori	knowledge	of	numbers,	by	virtue	of	their	cognitive
abilities	and	intelligence,	they	also	have	a	priori	knowledge	of	the	cosmos.
(Interestingly,	ancient	Greeks	like	Empedocles	believed	that	the	
gods	think	in
mathematical	terms	and	that	humans	who	were	mathematical	geniuses	were
godlike,	indeed	were	as	good	as	gods	themselves.	With	this	conviction,
Empedocles	threw	himself	over	the	top	of	Mt.	Etna	and	into	the	active
volcano	below.)
If	number	represents	the	archetype	of	order	become	conscious,	it	still	does
not	answer	the	question	of	
what
	is	ultimately	responsible	for	this	state	of
order.	What	underlies	number	and	images	of	order?	What	is	the	archetype	of
order	
per	se?
	There	must	be	a	dynamic	force	operating	behind	the	scenes	that
creates	the	order	apparent	in	synchronisitic	phenomena	and	reveals	itself	in
number	and	image.	Jung	is	working	his	way	toward	a	new	cosmology,	a
statement	about	the	principle	of	order	not	only	for	the	psyche	but	also	for	the
world.	It	is	to	be	a	statement	that	is	not	primarily	mythological	in	the	religious
or	imaginal	sense,	but	rather	one	that	is	based	on	the	scientific	world	view	of

modern	times.	This	leads	him	to	the	broader	definition	of	synchronicity.
A	New	Paradigm
Toward	the	end	of	his	paper,	Jung	introduces	the	far-reaching	idea	of
including	synchronicity—along	with	space,	time,	and	causality—in	a
paradigm	that	can	offer	a	complete	account	of	reality	as	it	is	experienced	by
humans	and	measured	by	scientists.	In	one	sense,	what	Jung	is	doing	here	is
inserting	the	psyche	into	the	full	account	of	reality	by	saying	that	“the
meaningful	coincidence	between	a	psychic	event	and	an	objective	event”
16
must	be	considered.	This	adds	the	element	of	meaning	to	the	scientific
paradigm,	which	otherwise	proceeds	without	reference	to	human
consciousness	or	to	the	value	of	meaning.	Jung	is	proposing	that	a	full
account	of	reality	must	include	the	presence	of	the	human	psyche—the
observer—and	the	element	of	meaning.
We	have	already	seen	in	earlier	chapters	the	tremendous	importance	that
Jung	assigned	to	human	consciousness.	In	fact,	he	saw	the	meaning	of	human
life	on	this	planet	to	be	tied	to	our	capacity	for	consciousness,	to	add	to	the
world	a	mirroring	awareness	of	things	and	meanings	that	otherwise	would	run
on	through	endless	eons	of	time	without	being	seen,	thought,	or	recognized.
For	Jung,	the	raising	into	consciousness	of	patterns	and	images	from	the
depths	of	the	collective	psychoid	unconscious	gives	humankind	its	purpose	in
the	universe,	for	we	alone	(as	far	as	we	know)	are	able	to	realize	these
patterns	and	give	expression	to	what	we	realize.	Put	another	way,	God	needs
us	in	order	to	become	held	in	awareness.	Humans	are	in	a	position	to	become
aware	that	the	cosmos	has	an	ordering	principle.	We	can	note	and	register	the
meaning	that	is	there.	But	Jung	also	keenly	wants	to	emphasize	that	he	is	not
just	trying	to	do	speculative	philosophy	here.	That	would	be	traditional	and
old-fashioned,	and	would	belong	to	a	premodern	level	of	consciousness.	He	is
striving	for	Stage	5	and	even	Stage	6	consciousness	(see	chapter	8)	and	so	is
working	empirically	and	scientifically.	Synchronicity	is	not	primarily	a
philosophical	view,	he	wants	to	argue,	but	a	concept	based	on	empirical	fact
and	observation.	It	can	be	tested	in	laboratories.	
17
	Only	a	cosmology	of	this
sort	will	be	acceptable	in	the	contemporary	world.	Nostalgia	for	traditional
belief	systems	is	to	be	found	in	many	quarters	of	our	world	today,	but	for	the
present	and	future,	and	for	the	highest	levels	of	consciousness,	the	paradigm
cannot	be	mythological.	It	must	be	scientific.

As	the	basis	for	a	new	world	view,	the	concept	of	synchronicity	and	its
implications	work	because	they	are	easy	enough	to	understand	intuitively	and
to	incorporate	into	one’s	everyday	life.	Everyone	is	aware	of	lucky	things
happening,	and	of	unlucky	days	when	nothing	seems	to	go	right.	Clusters	of
events	that	are	related	through	meaning	and	image	but	unconnected	causally
can	be	readily	experienced	and	verified	by	one	and	all.	But	to	take	this
concept	seriously	as	a	scientific	principle	is	not	at	all	easy.	It	is	revolutionary.
For	one	thing,	it	requires	an	entirely	new	way	of	thinking	about	nature	and
history.	If	one	is	to	find	meaning	in	historical	events,	for	example,	the
implication	is	that	the	underlying	archetype	of	order	is	arranging	history	in
such	a	way	as	to	produce	some	further	advance	of	consciousness.	This	does
not	mean	progress	as	humans	would	like	to	think	of	it,	but	rather	an	advance
in	understanding	reality.	The	understanding	may	amount	to	recognition	of	the
terrible	side	of	reality	as	well	as	the	beauty	and	the	glory	of	it.
This	was	Jung’s	driving	notion	in	writing	
Aion
.	Western	religious	and
cultural	history	over	the	past	two	thousand	years	can	be	seen	as	a	pattern	of
unfolding	consciousness	about	an	underlying	archetypal	structure.	There	are
no	accidents	in	the	meandering	and	vicissitudes	of	historical	process.	It	is
going	somewhere,	producing	a	specific	image	that	needs	to	be	mirrored	and
reflected	in	human	consciousness.	There	is	a	light	side	and	a	dark	side	to	this
image.	This	same	mode	of	reflection	can	be	applied	to	an	individual’s	life
history	as	well	as	to	collective	history,	and	indeed	the	two	can	(and	indeed
should	be)	seen	in	relation	to	one	another	and	joined	in	a	meaningful	way.
Each	of	us	is	the	carrier	of	a	bit	of	the	consciousness	that	is	needed	by	the
times	in	order	to	advance	consciousness	of	the	underlying	motifs	unfolding	in
history.	Individual	dreams	of	an	archetypal	nature,	for	instance,	may	be	in	the
service	of	the	times,	compensating	for	the	one-sidedness	of	culture,	and	not
only	of	the	individual’s	consciousness.	In	this	sense,	the	individual	is	a
cocreator	of	the	reflection	of	reality	that	history	as	a	whole	reveals.
The	mental	leaps	required	to	think	of	culture	and	history	in	terms	that
include	synchronicity	are	considerable,	particularly	for	narrowly	rationalistic
Westerners	who	are	committed	strictly	to	the	principle	of	causality.	The	Age
of	Enlightenment	left	a	legacy	of	facticity	without	meaning.	The	cosmos	and
history,	it	is	supposed,	are	arranged	by	chance	and	by	the	causal	laws	that
govern	matter.	Jung	recognizes	the	challenge.	He	was	himself,	after	all,
steeped	in	the	Western	scientific	world	view.	“The	idea	of	synchronicity	with
its	inherent	quality	of	meaning	produces	a	picture	of	the	world	so
irrepresentable	as	to	be	completely	baffling.	The	advantage,	however,	of
adding	this	concept	is	that	it	makes	possible	a	view	which	includes	the

psychoid	factor	in	our	description	and	knowledge	of	nature—that	is,	an	a
priori	meaning	or	‘equivalence’.”	
18
	Jung	presents	a	diagram	that	he	and	the
physicist	Wolfgang	Pauli	worked	out.
On	the	vertical	axis	lies	the	space-time	continuum,	and	on	the	horizontal
there	is	the	continuum	between	causality	and	synchronicity.	The	most
complete	account	of	reality,	it	is	claimed	here,	includes	understanding	a
phenomenon	by	considering	four	
factors:	where	and	when	the	event	happened
(the	space-time	continuum),	and	what	led	up	to	it	and	what	it	means	(the
causality-synchronicity	continuum).	If	these	questions	can	be	answered,	the
event	will	be	grasped	in	its	fullness.	There	might	be	debate	on	any	and	all	of
these	points;	certainly	on	the	question	of	an	event’s	meaning	there	is	bound	to
be	a	great	deal	of	difference	and	dispute.	Interpretations	are	endlessly
generated,	especially	regarding	significant	events	like	the	explosion	of	the
first	atomic	bomb,	for	example,	not	to	mention	much	more	personal	events
like	the	birth	or	death	of	someone	in	the	family.	There	is	room	for	widely
diverging	opinions	here.	There	is	also,	of	course,	a	large	range	of	opinion
about	causality.	Jung’s	point	is	that	the	answer	to	the	question	of	meaning
requires	more	than	only	an	account	of	the	causal	sequence	of	events	that	led
up	to	the	event	in	question.	He	argues	that	synchronicity	must	be	considered
in	arriving	at	an	answer	to	the	question	of	meaning.	From	the	psychological
and	the	psychoid	side	of	things,	one	has	to	investigate	the	archetypal	patterns
that	are	evident	in	a	constellated	situation,	for	these	will	provide	the	necessary
parameters	for	taking	up	the	question	of	synchronicity	and	deep	structural
meaning.	With	respect	to	the	appearance	of	the	atomic	bomb	on	the	stage	of
world	history,	for	instance,	the	exploration	of	meaning	would	have	to	include
the	world	constellating	factor	of	the	Second	World	War	and	the	polarization
of	opposites	which	that	war	so	violently	generated.	One	would	also	have	to
include	contemporary	humankind’s	dreams	of	the	atomic	bomb	in	the
analysis.	What	does	the	atomic	bomb	add	to	one-sided	human	consciousness
about	the	structures	of	Being?
In	order	to	bring	the	theory	of	archetypes	into	play	in	relation	to
synchronistic	events	that	transgress	the	boundaries	of	the	psychic	
world,	Jung
was	forced	to	expand	upon	his	notion	of	the	nonpsychic	nature	of	the

archetype.	On	the	one	hand,	it	is	psychic	and	psychological,	since	it	is
experienced	within	the	psyche	in	the	form	of	images	and	ideas.	On	the	other
hand,	it	is	irrepresentable	in	itself	and	its	essence	lies	outside	of	the	psyche.	In
this	essay	on	synchronicity,	Jung	introduces	the	idea	of	the	archetype’s
property	of	
transgressivity.
	“Although	associated	with	causal	processes,	or
‘carried’	by	them,	they	[the	archetypes]	continually	go	beyond	their	frame	of
reference,	an	infringement	to	which	I	would	give	the	name	‘transgressivity’,
because	the	archetypes	are	not	found	exclusively	in	the	psychic	sphere,	but
can	occur	just	as	much	in	circumstances	that	are	not	psychic	(equivalence	of
an	outward	physical	process	with	a	psychic	one).”
19
	The	archetype
transgresses	both	the	boundaries	of	the	psyche	and	of	causality,	although	it	is
“carried”	by	both.	Jung	intends	transgressivity	to	mean	that	the	patterns	which
occur	in	the	psyche	are	related	to	patterns	and	events	that	lie	outside	of	the
psyche.	The	feature	common	to	both	is	the	archetype.	In	the	case	of	the
atomic	bomb,	the	archetype	of	the	self	is	revealed	in	history	inside	and
outside	of	the	psyche	by	the	event	of	its	explosion,	in	and	through	the	world
historical	context	in	which	it	appeared,	and	by	millions	(my	guess,	although
there	has	been	some	research	on	this)	of	dreams	that	have	featured	the	bomb.
This	idea	of	the	archetype’s	transgressivity	cuts	in	two	directions.	First,	as	I
have	been	discussing,	it	affirms	that	there	is	underlying	objective	meaning	in
the	coincidences	that	fall	together	in	psyche	and	world	and	strike	us	as
intuitively	meaningful.	On	the	other	hand,	it	creates	the	possibility	that	there
is	meaning	where	we	do	not	intuitively	see	it,	when,	for	instance,	accidents
take	place	that	strike	us	as	merely	due	to	pure	chance.	In	both	cases,	this	type
of	meaning	goes	beyond	(transgresses)	the	chain	of	linear	causality.	Is	our
birth	into	a	particular	family	only	due	to	chance	and	causality,	or	could	there
be	meaning	here	as	well?	Or	suppose	that	the	psyche	is	organized	and
structured	not	only	causally,	as	is	usually	thought	of	in	developmental
psychology,	but	also	synchronistically.	This	would	mean	that	personality
development	takes	place	by	moments	of	meaningful	coincidence
(synchronicity)	as	well	as	by	a	pre-ordained	epigenetic	sequence	of	stages.	It
would	also	imply	that	the	instinct	groups	and	the	archetypes	become	wedded
and	activated	both	causally	and	synchronistically	(meaningfully).	An	instinct
like	sexuality,	for	example,	might	become	activated	not	only	because	of	a
causal	chain	of	sequential	events	(genetic	factors,	psychological	fixations,	or
early	childhood	experiences)	but	also	because	an	archetypal	field	is
constellated	at	a	particular	moment	and	a	chance	encounter	with	a	person
turns	into	a	lifelong	relationship.	In	this	moment,	something	of	the	psychoid
world	becomes	visible	and	conscious	(the	
syzygy,
	the	soul	mate	pair).	The

constellated	image	of	the	archetype	does	not	create	the	event,	but	the
correspondence	between	inner	psychological	preparedness	(which	may	be
totally	unconscious	at	the	time)	and	the	outer	appearance	of	a	person,
inexplicably	and	unpredictably,	is	synchronistic.	Why	such	connections	take
place	seems	a	mystery	if	we	reflect	only	upon	causality,	but	if	we	introduce
the	synchronistic	factor	and	the	dimension	of	meaning	we	come	closer	to	a
more	complete	and	satisfying	answer.	In	a	random	universe,	this	falling
together	of	need	and	opportunity,	or	desire	and	satisfaction,	would	be
impossible,	or	at	least	statistically	improbable.	These	unforgettable	mysteries
that	are	embodied	in	synchronistic	events	transform	people.	Lives	are	turned
in	new	directions,	and	contemplation	of	what	lies	behind	synchronistic	events
leads	consciousness	to	profound,	perhaps	even	to	ultimate	levels	of	reality.
When	an	archetypal	field	is	constellated	and	the	pattern	emerges
synchronistically	within	the	psyche	and	the	objective	non-psychic	world,	one
has	the	experience	of	being	in	Tao.	And	what	becomes	available	to
consciousness	through	such	experiences	is	foundational,	a	vision	into	as	much
of	ultimate	reality	as	humans	are	capable	of	realizing.	Falling	into	the
archetypal	world	of	synchronistic	events	feels	like	living	in	the	will	of	God.
Cosmology
The	essay	on	synchronicity	begins	with	and	indeed	focuses	mostly	on	what
Jung	calls	the	“narrow	definition”	of	synchronicity,	that	is,	the	meaningful
coincidence	between	a	psychic	event	such	as	a	
dream	or	thought	and	an	event
in	the	non-psychic	world.	But	Jung	also	considers	the	broader	definition.	This
has	to	do	with	acausal	orderedness	in	the	world	without	special	reference	to
the	human	psyche.	This	is	a	“wider	conception	of	synchronicity	as	an	‘acausal
orderedness’”
20
	in	the	world.	This	becomes	Jung’s	cosmological	statement.
Synchronicity,	or	“acausal	orderedness,”	is	a	principle	underlying	cosmic	law.
“Into	this	category	come	all	‘acts	of	creation’,	a	priori	factors	such	as	the
properties	of	natural	numbers,	the	discontinuities	of	modern	physics,	etc.
Consequently	we	would	have	to	include	constant	and	experimentally
reproducible	phenomena	within	the	scope	of	our	expanded	concept,	though
this	does	not	seem	to	accord	with	the	nature	of	the	phenomena	included	in
synchronicity	narrowly	understood.”
21
	From	the	viewpoint	of	the	general
principle	of	synchronicity,	our	human	experience	of	acausal	orderedness,
through	the	psychoid	factor	and	the	transgressivity	of	the	archetype,	is	a

special	case	of	much	broader	orderedness	in	the	universe.
With	this	cosmological	picture	I	place	the	finishing	touch	on	Jung’s	map	of
the	soul.	His	explorations	of	the	psyche	and	its	borders	led	him	into	territory
that	is	normally	occupied	by	cosmologists,	philosophers,	and	theologians.	His
map	of	the	soul	must	however	be	placed	within	the	context	of	this	wider
perspective,	for	this	is	what	provides	the	most	extensive	reach	of	his	unified
vision.	We	human	beings,	he	teaches,	have	a	special	role	to	play	in	the
universe.	Our	consciousness	is	capable	of	reflecting	the	cosmos	and	bringing
it	into	the	mirror	of	consciousness.	We	can	come	to	realize	that	we	live	in	a
universe	which	can	best	be	described	using	four	principles:	indestructible
energy,	the	space-time	continuum,	causality,	and	synchronicity.	Jung	diagrams
this	relationship	as	shown	below.
The	human	psyche	and	our	personal	psychology	participate	in	the	order	of
this	universe	most	profoundly	through	the	psychoid	level	of	the	unconscious.
Through	the	process	of	psychization,	patterns	of	order	in	the	universe	become
available	to	consciousness	and	eventually	can	be	understood	and	integrated.
Each	person	can	witness	the	Creator	and	creative	works	from	within,	so	to
speak,	by	paying	attention	to	image	and	synchronicity.	For	the	
archetype	is
not	only	the	pattern	of	the	psyche,	but	it	also	reflects	the	actual	basic	structure
of	the	universe.	“As	above,	so	below,”	spake	the	ancient	sages.	“As	within,	so
without,”	responds	the	modern	soul	explorer,	Carl	Gustav	Jung.


Notes
Introduction
1
	
Jung,	
Collected	Works
,	Vol.	6.
2
	
Jung,	
Coll.	Wks.,
	Vol.	1,	pp.	3-88.
3
	
Jung,	
Coll.	Wks.,
	Vol.	3,	pp.	1-152.
4
	
Henri	Ellenberger,	
The	Discovery	of	the	Unconscious,
	p.	687.
5
	
Jung,	
Memories,	Dreams,	Reflections,
	pp.	182-83.
1.	Surface	(Ego-Consciousness)
1
	
Jung,	
Coll.	Wks.,
	Vol.	4,	par.	772.
2
	
Jung,	
Coll.	Wks.,
	Vol.	9/ii,	par.	1.
3
	
Ibid.
4
	
Jung,	
Coll.	Wks.,
	Vol.	8,	par.	382.
5
	
Jung,	
Memories,	Dreams,	Reflections
,	p.	32.
6
	
Many	animal	species	do	seem	to	have	considerable,	though	peculiar	and
puzzling,	communications	abilities	and	resources.	To	our	knowledge,
however,	these	are	but	slight	compared	to	even	the	most	reduced	human
capacity	to	learn	languages	and	to	function	in	a	linguistic	universe.	No	doubt
many	of	their	nonverbal	communications	abilities	have	yet	to	be	discovered.
7
	
Jung,	
Memories,	Dreams,	Reflections,
	p.	45.
8
	
Jung,	
Coll.	Wks.,
	9/1,	par.	3.
9
	
Ibid.
10
	
Ibid.
11
	
Ibid.
12
	
Ibid.
13
	
Ibid.

14
	
Jung’s	fundamental	identity	as	a	scientist	underlies	his	admission	that	the
theory	of	archetypes	is	a	hypothesis.	To	do	otherwise	would	have	been	to
engage	in	mythmaking	and	visionary	pronouncement,	the	basis	for	religion
rather	than	for	science.	Jung’s	writings	are	occasionally	treated	as	dogma,	but
they	should	not	be,	since	he	bases	himself	on	an	empirical	method	and	claims
the	role	of	scientist	rather	than	prophet.
15
	
Jung,	
op.	cit.,
	par.	5
16
	
William	James,	
Principles	of	Psychology,
	Vol.	1,	pp.	291-400.
17
	
Jung,	
op.	cit.,
	par.	6.
18
	
Jung,	
Coll.	Wks.,
	Vol.	6,	p.	v.
19
	
Jung	borrowed	this	phrase	from	the	French	anthropologist	Levy-Bruhl	to
describe	the	ego’s	most	primitive	relation	to	the	world	and	to	the	surrounding
group	or	tribe.	
Participation	mystique
	refers	to	a	state	of	primitive	identity
between	self	and	object,	whether	the	object	is	a	thing,	a	person,	or	a	group.
Charismatic	political	leaders	like	Mao	Tse	Tung	sought	to	cultivate	this	state
of	consciousness	among	their	people.	“One	China,	one	mind”—meaning
Mao’s	mind—was	the	Chinese	dictator’s	slogan	during	the	disastrous	cultural
revolution.
20
	
Jung,	
op
.	
cit.,
	par.	9.
21
	
Ibid.
22
	
Romans	7:	15-18.
23
	
Jung,	
op.	cit.
2.	The	Populated	Interior	(The	Complexes)
1
	
The	Word	Association	Experiment	was	a	test	invented	by	Galton	and
revised	by	the	German	psychologist	Wilhelm	Wundt,	who	introduced	it	into
continental	experimental	psychology	in	the	late	nineteenth	century.	Before
Jung	and	Bleuler	adopted	it,	it	had	been	used	mainly	for	theoretical	studies	on
how	the	mind	associates	words	and	ideas	(see	
Coll.	Wks.
	
2,	par.	730).
Following	the	lead	of	Bleuler	and	the	inspiration	of	Freud’s	work	on	the
importance	of	unconscious	factors	in	mental	life,	Jung	tried	to	turn	the	test	to
practical	use	in	the	psychiatric	clinic	while	also	continuing	to	use	the	results
from	it	for	theorizing	about	the	structure	of	the	psyche.

2
	
For	details	about	this	research,	see	Ellenberger,	
The	Discovery	of	the
Unconscious,
	p.	692ff.
3
	
For	a	fascinating	discussion	of	Freud’s	use	of	the	terms	complex	and	core
complex,	see	Kerr,	
A	Most	Dangerous	Method
,	p.	247ff.
4
	
Jung,	
Coll.	Wks.,
	Vol.	2,	par.	8.
5
	
Ibid,	pars.	1015ff.
6
	
Jung,	
Coll.	Wks.,
	Vol.	8,	pars.	194-219.
7
	
The	various	strands	of	opinion	in	this	discussion	have	been	published	
in
Lingering	Shadows.
	These	arguments	have	been	reviewed	by	Anthony
Stevens	in	his	book	
Jung,
	where	he	strongly	takes	the	position	that	Jung	was
not	guilty	of	anti-Semitic	and	pro-Nazi	behavior.	The	contrary	view	has	been
presented	in	a	number	of	papers	by	Andrew	Samuels.
8
	
Jung,	
op.	cit.,
	par.198.
9
	
Ibid.
10
	
Ibid.
11
	
Jung,	“New	Aspects	of	Criminal	Psychology,”	in	
Coll.	Wks.,
	Vol.	2,	pars.
1316-47.
12
	
Joseph	Henderson	has	been	the	strongest	exponent	of	this	view	in	Jungian
terms.	For	a	detailed	discussion	of	the	cultural	unconscious	and	its	various
aspects,	see	Henderson’s	“Cultural	Attitudes	and	the	Cultural	Unconscious”
in	
Shadow	and	Self
,	pp.	103-26.
13
	
This	point	has	been	greatly	elaborated	in	the	important	paper	by	Hans
Dieckmann,	“Formation	of	and	Dealing	with	Symbols	in	Borderline	Patients.”
14
	
Jung,	
Coll.	Wks.,
	Vol.	8,	par.	201.
15
	
Ibid.
16
	
Ibid.
17
	
Ibid.,	par.	202.
18
	
Ibid.
19
	
Ibid.
20
	
Ibid.
21
	
Ibid.,	par.	204.
22
	
Ibid.

23
	
Ibid.
3.	Psychic	Energy	(Libido	Theory)
1
	
William	McGuire	(ed.),	
The	Freud-Jung	Letters,
	pp.	6-7.
2
	
Jung,	
Memories,	Dreams,	Reflections,
	p.	164.
3
	
In	Jung.	
Coll.	Wks.,
	Vol.	8,	pars.	1-130.
4
	
McGuire,	
op
.	
cit.,
	p.	461.
5
	
Jung,	
Psychology	of	the	Unconscious
,	pp.	142-43.
6
	
McGuire,	
op.	cit.,
	p.	460.
7
	
Jung,	
Psychology	of	the	Unconscious,,
	pp.	144-45.
8
	
Ibid.,	p.	156.
9
	
Jung,	
Memories,	Dreams,	Reflections,
	p.	167.
10
	
Jung,	
Psychology	of	the	Unconscious,
	p.	480.
11
	
Jung,	
Coll.	Wks.,
	Vol.	5.
12
	
Jung’s	views	on	the	value	of	regular	work	are	interesting	in	this	regard.
The	work	ethic	is	actually	an	emancipator,	in	his	view,	from	the	bondage	to
the	incest	wish.	“The	destruction	of	slavery	was	the	necessary	condition	of
that	sublimation	[of	incestuous	sexuality],	for	antiquity	had	
not	yet	recognized
the	duty	of	work	and	work	as	a	duty,	as	a	social	need	of	fundamental
importance.	Slave	labor	was	compulsory	work,	the	counterpart	of	the	equally
disastrous	compulsion	of	the	libido	of	the	privileged.	It	was	only	the
obligation	of	the	individual	to	work	which	made	possible	in	the	long	run	that
regular	“drainage”	of	the	unconscious,	which	was	inundated	by	the	continual
regression	of	the	libido.	Indolence	is	the	beginning	of	all	vice,	because	in	a
condition	of	slothful	dreaming	the	libido	has	abundant	opportunity	for	sinking
into	itself,	in	order	to	create	compulsory	obligations	by	means	of	regressively
reanimated	incestuous	bonds.	The	best	liberation	is	through	
regular	work.
Work,	however,	is	salvation	only	when	it	is	a	free	act,	and	has	in	itself	nothing
of	infantile	compulsion.	In	this	respect,	religious	ceremony	appears	in	a	high
degree	as	organized	inactivity,	and	at	the	same	time	as	the	forerunner	of
modern	work”	(
Psychology	of	the	Unconscious,
	p.	455).	This	is	a	version	of
the	notion	
Arbeit	macht	frei,
	used	so	despicably	by	the	Nazis	in	their	work

camps	where	precisely	slavery	was	institutionalized.	It	is	when	work	is	freely
chosen	and	accepted	as	a	duty	to	life	that	the	transformation	of	libido	can	take
place.	When	one	freely	chooses	a	vocation	and	voluntarily	sacrifices	a	great
deal	of	pleasure	and	sensual	gratification	for	the	sake	of	learning	and
practicing	it,	the	transformation	of	libido	has	been	successful.
13
	
George	Hoganson	discusses	this	issue	of	authority	extensively	in	his	book
Jung’s	Struggle	with	Freud.
14
	
Jung,	
Coll.	Wks.,
	Vol.	8,	pars.	6ff.
15
	
Ibid.,	par.	5.
16
	
Ibid.,	par.	58.
17
	
Ibid.
18
	
Ibid.
19
	
A	therapist	who	took	this	finalistic	energic	viewpoint	might	justifiably	be
seen	as	impersonal	and	unempathic.	There	would	be	little	attention	paid	to
causative	factors	like	childhood	traumas	or	conflicted	and	abusive
relationships	in	the	past.	The	focus	would	be	on	tracking	the	flow	of	energy
from	ego	to	unconscious	(regression)	to	new	adaptation	(progression)	and	on
analyzing	away	attitudes	and	cognitive	structures	that	might	prevent	or	block
the	flow	of	libido	from	finding	its	natural	gradient	or	pathway.	It	is	a	much
more	cognitive	approach.	The	empathic	analyst,	on	the	other	hand,	would
look	for	past	reasons	for	the	present	difficulty	and	would	show	understanding
for	how	the	past	has	created	the	problems	in	the	present.	Jung	in	general	felt
that	the	Freudian	approach	was	of	the	causal-mechanistic,	empathic	variety
while	his	own	approach	was	more	the	finalistic-energic,	impersonal	type.	The
analyst	who	dissects	the	psyche	with	a	view	to	analyzing	the	movement	of
energy	and	facilitating	its	flow	toward	the	goal	of	balance	and	equilibrium	is
using	the	impersonal	method.	Extroverts,	in	Jung’s	typological	understanding,
are	usually	more	attracted	to	causal	theories,	while	introverts	favor	a	
finalistic
approach	that	is	more	abstract.	Many	contemporary	analysts	try	to	combine
them.
20
	
The	difference	between	Adler	and	Freud	was	an	important	element	in
Jung’s	struggle	with	Freud,	and	his	continuing	efforts	to	understand	the
interpersonal	dynamics	entered	into	his	theory	of	psychological	types	as	well.
One	reason	Jung	was	drawn	to	investigate	personality	differences	in	terms	of
psychological	type	had	to	do	with	understanding	the	difference	between	the
theoretical	positions	of	Adler	and	Freud.	Both	theories	had	a	lot	to	offer	and
both	seemed	correct	in	many	ways.	Yet	Jung,	who	differed	from	both	Freud

and	Adler,	concluded	that	Freud’s	theory	was	fundamentally	extroverted	in
the	sense	of	assuming	drives	that	seek	pleasure	and	release	via	objects,	while
Adler’s	was	introverted	because	it	saw	people	as	basically	in	search	of
establishing	ego	control	over	objects.	Jung	saw	the	power	need	described	in
Adler’s	theory	as	basically	the	need	of	introverted	individuals	to	control	the
object	world	rather	than	relate	to	it	and	derive	pleasure	from	it.	Introverted
people	are	more	motivated	by	the	drive	for	power	and	control	over
threatening	objects	than	by	the	search	for	pleasure.	Extroverts,	on	the	other
hand,	are	oriented	by	the	pleasure	principle	and	these	people	conform	to
Freud’s	psychological	perspective.	Both	Freud,	who	sees	human	beings	as
basically	extroverted	and	driven	by	the	pleasure	principle,	and	Adler,	who
sees	us	as	introverted	and	driven	by	the	need	for	power,	offer	true
explanations	of	human	behavior,	but	each	man	approached	the	psyche	from	a
different	perspective	and	in	a	sense	was	describing	a	different	type	of
individual.
21
	
Jung,	
op.	cit.,
	pars.	79-87.
22
	
Ibid.,	pars.	88-113.
23
	
Jung,	
Letters
,	Vol.	2,	p.	624.
24
	
Jung,	
Coll.	Wks.,
	Vol.	8,	pars.	818-968.
4.	The	Psyche’s	Boundaries	(Instincts,	Archetypes,
and	the	Collective	Unconscious)
1
	
This	area—the	collective	unconscious—has	caused	academic	psychology	to
shy	away	from	Jung	and	to	call	him	a	mystic.	Only	in	recent	times	have	the
tools	become	available,	in	the	form	of	biological	research	techniques
particularly	on	the	brain	and	on	the	relation	of	brain	chemistry	to	mood	and
thought,	to	tackle	the	far-reaching	hypotheses	put	forward	by	Jung	many
decades	ago.	Much	recent	research	on	the	biological	bases	of	human	behavior
is	tending	to	confirm	Jung’s	views	that	we	inherit	a	great	deal	of	the	mental
and	behavioral	patterning	that	had	been	considered	learned	and	the	result	of
nurture,	not	nature	(see	Satinover,	Stevens,	Tresan).	For	Jung,	the	archetypes
are	like	instincts,	in	that	they	are	given	with	our	genetic	makeup,	inborn.
2
	
In	fact,	Jung	has	been	seen	by	some	writers	(for	example,	Philip	Rieff)	as	an
antiquarian	throwback	to	the	18th	century,	when	amateur	scholars	and
scientists	simply	collected	odd	bits	of	information	about	everything	in	the

world	and	created	libraries	and	museums	that	showed	little	understanding	of
what	they	were	housing.	Needless	to	add,	Rieff	is	a	diehard	Freudian.
3
	
Jung,	
Letters,
	Vol.	1,	p.	29.
4
	
Ibid.,	p.	30.
5
	
Ibid.,	p.	29.
6
	
Jung,	
Coll	Wks,
	Vol.	4,	par.	728.
7
	
Jung,	
Memories,	Dreams,	Reflections,
	p.	161.
8
	
Ibid.
9
	
Jung,	
Coll.	Wks.,
	Vol.	8,	par.	400.
10
	
Ibid.
11
	
Ibid.,	par.	401.
12
	
Ibid.,	par.	402.
13
	
Ibid.,	par.	367.
14
	
Ibid.,	par.	368,	citing	Bleuler.
15
	
Ibid.,	par.	376.
16
	
Ibid.,	par.	377.
17
	
Ibid.
18
	
Ibid.
19
	
Ibid.,	par.	379.
20
	
Ibid.
21
	
Ibid.
22
	
Ibid.
23
	
Ibid.,	par.	398.
24
	
Ibid.,	par.	404.
25
	
Ibid.
26
	
Ibid.,	par.	405.
27
	
Ibid.,	par.	406.
28
	
Ibid.
29
	
Ibid.

30
	
Ibid.
31
	
Ibid.,	par.	407.
32
	
Ibid.,	par.	408.
33
	
Ibid.,	par.	415.
34
	
Ibid.
35
	
Ibid.,	par.	416.
36
	
Ibid.
37
	
Ibid.
5.	The	Revealed	and	the	Concealed	in	Relations
with	Others	(Persona	and	Shadow)
1
	
For	a	fuller	discussion	of	Jung’s	views	on	the	subject	of	evil,	see	
Jung	on
Evil,
	edited	and	with	an	extensive	introduction	by	Murray	Stein.
2
	
Jung,	
Coll.	Wks.,
	Vol.	6,	par.	799.
3
	
Ibid.
4
	
Ibid.
5
	
Ibid.,	par.	687.
6
	
Ibid.
7
	
Ibid.,	par.	798.
8
	
Ibid.
9
	
Ibid.
10
	
Jung,	
Coll.	Wks.,
	Vol.	13,	par.	70.
6.	The	Way	to	the	Deep	Interior	(Anima	and
Animus)
1
	
Jung,	
Memories,	Dreams,	Reflections,
	pp.	185-88.

2
	
Ibid.,	p.	186.
3
	
Taken	from	Jung’s	“Visions	Seminar,”	as	quoted	in	
Memories,	Dreams,
Reflections,
	p.	392.
4
	
Jung,	
Coll.	Wks.,
	Vol.	6,	par.	801.
5
	
Ibid.
6
	
Ibid.
7
	
Ibid.,	par.	801.
8
	
Ibid.
9
	
Ibid.,	par.	802.
10
	
The	view	was	reported	in	
The	New	Yorker
,	Sept.	9,	1996,	p.	34	as	the
presidential	candidates	were	preparing	for	the	coming	election.
11
	
Jung,	
op.	cit.,
	par.	804.
12
	
Ibid.
13
	
Ibid.
14
	
Ibid.
15
	
Ibid.
16
	
Ibid.
17
	
Ibid.
18
	
Jung,	
Coll.	Wks.,
	Vol.	17,	par.	338.
19
	
Jung,	
Coll.	Wks.,
	Vol.	9/2,	par.	26.
20
	
Ibid.,	par.	41.
21
	
Ibid.,	par.	42.
22
	
Ibid.
23
	
Jung,	
Coll.	Wks.,
	Vol.	16,	par.	521.
24
	
Jung,	
Coll.	Wks.,
	Vol.	9/ii,	par.	29.
7.	The	Psyche’s	Transcendent	Center	and
Wholeness	(The	Self)

1
	
Jung,	
Memories,	Dreams,	Reflections,
	pp.	170-99.
2
	
Ibid.,	p.	378.
3
	
Ibid.,	p.	379.
4
	
Jung’s	account	of	this	remarkable	incident	is	found	in	
Memories,	Dreams,
Reflections,
	pp.	189-91.
5
	
Op.	cit.,	pp.	195-97.
6
	
Ibid.,	p.	199.
7
	
Jung,	
Coll.	Wks.,
	9/2,	pars.	57-58.
8
	
Ibid.,	par.	59.
9
	
Ibid.
10
	
Ibid.
11
	
Ibid.,	par.	60.
12
	
Ibid.
13
	
Ibid.,	pars.,	351-57.
14
	
Ibid.,	par.	351.
15
	
Ibid.,	par.	357.
16
	
Ibid.,	par.	355.
8.	Emergence	of	the	Self	(Individuation)
1
	
Jung,	
Coll.	Wks.,
	Vol.	8,	par.	778.
2
	
Ibid.,	par.	550.
3
	
Jung,	
op.	cit.,
	par.	769.
4
	
Jung,	
Coll.	Wks.,
	Vol.	9/1,	pp.	290-354.
5
	
Jung,	
Coll.	Wks.,
	Vol.	13,	pp.	199-201.
6
	
Modern	Man	in	Search	of	a	Soul
	was	the	title	of	a	famous	book	published
by	Jung	in	1933.
7
	
Jung,	
The	Psychology	of	Kundalini	Yoga.
8
	
The	volume,	which	appeared	in	1952,	was	entitled	
Naturerklärung	und

Psyche.
	(Studien	aus	dem	C.G.	Jung-Institut	Zurich,	4).
9
	
Jung,	
Coll.	Wks.,
	Vol.	13,	pars.	248-49.
10
	
Jung,	Coll.	Wks,	Vol.	10,	pp.	437-55.
11
	
Jung,	
Coll.	Wks.,
	Vol.	9/1,	pp.	275-89.
12
	
Ibid.,	pp.	290-354.
13
	
Ibid.,	par.	520.
14
	
Ibid.,	par.	221.
15
	
Ibid.,	par.	522.
16
	
Ibid.,	par.	523.
17
	
Ibid.,	par.	525.
18
	
The	beautiful	color	plates	of	this	series	are	inserted	in	
Coll.	Wks.,
	Vol.	9/1,
following	p.	292.
19
	
Ibid.,	par.	538.
20
	
Ibid.
21
	
Ibid.
22
	
Ibid.
23
	
Ibid.,	par.	544.
24
	
Ibid.,	par.	548.
25
	
Ibid.,	par.	545.
26
	
Ibid.,	par.	548.
27
	
Ibid.,	par.	550.
28
	
Ibid.,	par.	549.
29
	
Ibid.,	par	556.
30
	
Jung,	
Coll.	Wks.,
	Vol.	9/2,	par.	410.
31
	
Ibid.,	par.	355.
32
	
Ibid.,	par.	410.
9.	Of	Time	and	Eternity	(Synchronicity)

1
	
He	was	also	interested	in	evidence	for	the	existence	of	ghosts	and
poltergeists,	certainly	borderline	phenomena.	And	then	there	was	the	
peculiar
relation	he	noted	between	psyche	(inner)	and	object	(outer),	as	in	the
“catalytic	exteriorization	phenomenon”	he	remarked	upon	in	Freud’s	presence
when	they	heard	a	loud	report	from	a	wooden	bookcase	in	Freud’s	study.	He
reports	on	this	in	
Memories,	Dreams,	Reflections,
	p.	155.
2
	
Jung,	
Coll.	Wks.,
	Vol.	8,	par.	843.
3
	
Ibid.,	par.	515.
4
	
This	essay	is	found	in	
Coll.	Wks.,
	Vol.	8,	pp.	419-519.
5
	
Jung,	Letters,	vol.	2,	pp.	108-9.
6
	
Op.	cit.,	par.	840.
7
	
Ibid.,	par.	439.
8
	
Ibid.
9
	
Ibid.,	par.	440.
10
	
Ibid.
11
	
Ibid.
12
	
Ibid.
13
	
Ibid.,	par.	850.
14
	
Ibid.
15
	
Ibid.,	par.	870.
16
	
Ibid.,	par.	850
17
	
Ibid.,	par.	960.
18
	
Ibid.,	par.	962.
19
	
Ibid.,	par.	964.
20
	
Ibid.,	par.	965.
21
	
Ibid.

Glossary
anima
	The	archetypal	images	of	the	eternal	feminine	in	a	man’s	unconscious
that	forms	a	link	between	ego-consciousness	and	the	collective	unconscious
and	potentially	opens	a	way	to	the	self.
animus
	The	archetypal	images	of	the	eternal	masculine	in	a	woman’s
unconscious	that	forms	a	link	between	ego-consciousness	and	the	collective
unconscious	and	potentially	opens	a	way	to	the	self.
archetype
	An	innate	potential	pattern	of	imagination,	thought,	or	behavior
that	can	be	found	among	human	being	in	all	times	and	places.
archetypal	image
	A	psychic	pattern,	mental	or	behavioral,	that	is	common	to
the	human	species.	Archetypal	images	are	found	in	the	dreams	of	individuals
and	in	cultural	materials	such	as	myths,	fairy	tales,	and	religious	symbols.
compensation
	The	self-regulatory	dynamic	process	whereby	ego-
consciousness	and	the	unconscious	seek	homeostatic	balance,	which	also
fosters	individuation	and	the	progressive	movement	toward	wholeness.
complex
	A	feeling	toned	autonomous	content	of	the	personal	unconscious,
usually	formed	through	psychic	injury	or	trauma.
ego
	The	center	of	consciousness,	the	“I.”
ego-consciousness
	The	portion	of	the	psyche	made	up	of	easily	accessed
thoughts,	memories,	and	feelings	at	whose	center	is	the	ego,	the	“I.”
extroversion
	An	habitual	attitude	of	consciousness	that	prefers	active
engagement	with	objects	to	the	close	scrutiny	of	them.
imago
	The	psychic	representation	or	image	of	an	object,	like	a	parent,	not	to
be	confused	with	the	actual	object.
individuation
	The	process	of	psychic	development	that	leads	to	the	conscious
awareness	of	wholeness.	Not	to	be	confused	with	individualism.
instinct
	An	innate,	physically	based	source	of	psychic	energy	(or	libido)	that
is	shaped	and	structured	in	the	psyche	by	an	archetypal	image.
introversion
	An	habitual	attitude	of	consciousness	that	prefers	introspection
and	the	close	scrutiny	of	relations	with	objects.
libido
	Interchangeable	with	“psychic	energy”	and	having	affinities	with	the
philosophical	concept	of	“life	force.”	Libido	is	quantifiable	and	can	be
measured.

neurosis
	An	habitual	attitude	of	rigid	one-sidedness	in	ego-consciousness,
which	defensively	and	systematically	excludes	unconscious	contents	from
consciousness.
persona
	The	psychic	interface	between	the	individual	and	society	that	makes
up	a	person’s	social	identity.
projection
	The	externalization	of	unconscious	psychic	contents,	sometimes
for	defensive	purposes	(as	with	the	shadow)	and	sometimes	for
developmental	and	integrative	purposes	(as	with	the	anima	and	the	self).
psyche
	An	inclusive	term	covering	the	areas	of	consciousness,	personal
unconscious	and	collective	unconscious.	The	collective	unconscious	is
sometimes	referred	to	as	the	
objective	psyche
	because	it	is	not	personal	or
individual.
psychoid
	An	adjective	referring	to	the	boundaries	of	the	psyche,	one	of	which
interfaces	with	the	body	and	the	physical	world	and	the	other	with	the	realm
of	“spirit.”
psychological	type
	The	combination	of	one	of	two	
attitudes
	(extroversion	or
introversion)	with	one	of	four	
functions
	(	thinking,	feeling,	sensation,	or
intuition)	to	form	a	distinctive	habitual	orientation	of	ego-consciousness.
psychosis
	A	state	of	possession	in	which	ego-consciousness	is	flooded	by	the
unconscious	and	often	seeks	to	defend	itself	by	identifying	with	an	archetypal
image.
self
	The	center,	source	of	all	archetypal	images	and	of	innate	psychic
tendencies	toward	structure,	order,	and	integration.
shadow
	The	rejected	and	unaccepted	aspects	of	the	personality	that	are
repressed	and	form	a	compensatory	structure	to	the	ego’s	self	ideals	and	to	the
persona.
synchronicity
	The	meaningful	coincidence	of	two	events,	one	inner	and
psychic	and	the	other	outer	and	physical.
transcendent	function
	The	psychic	link	created	between	ego-consciousness
and	the	unconscious	as	a	result	of	the	practice	of	dream	interpretation	and
active	imagination,	and	therefore	essential	for	individuation	in	the	second	half
of	life.
unconscious
	The	portion	of	the	psyche	lying	outside	of	conscious	awareness.
The	contents	of	the	unconscious	are	made	up	of	repressed	memories	and
material,	such	as	thoughts	and	images	and	emotions,	that	has	never	been

conscious.	The	unconscious	is	divided	into	the	
personal	unconscious,
	which
contains	the	complexes,	and	the
collective	unconscious,
	which	houses	the	archetypal	images	and	instinct
groups.
wholeness
	The	emergent	sense	of	psychic	complexity	and	integrity	that
develops	over	the	course	of	a	complete	lifetime.

References
Burnham,	J.S.	and	McGuire,	W.	(eds.).	1983.	
Jelliffe:	American
Psychoanalyst	and	Physician.
	Chicago:	University	of	Chicago	Press.
Clark,	J.J.	1992.	
In	Search	of	Jung.
	London	and	New	York:	Routledge.
Csikszentmihalyi,	M.	1990.	
Flow.
	New	York:	Harper	and	Row.
Dieckman,	H.	1987.	On	the	theory	of	complexes.	In	
Archetypal	Processes	in
Psychotherapy
	(eds.	N.	Schwartz-Salant	and	M.	Stein).	Wilmette,	IL.:	Chiron
Publications.
————.	1988.	Formation	of	and	dealing	with	symbols	in	borderline
patients.	In	
The	Borderline	Personality	in	Analysis
	(eds.	N.	Schwartz-Salant
and	M.	Stein).	Wilmette,	IL.:	Chiron	Publications.
Ellenberger,	H.	1970.	
The	Discovery	of	the	Unconscious.
	New	York:	Basic
Books.
Erikson,	E.	1968.	
Identity,	Youth,	and	Crisis.
	New	York:	Norton.
Fordham,	F.	1953.	
An	Introduction	to	Jung’s	Psychology.
	Baltimore:	Penguin
Books.
Fordham,	M.	1970.	
Children	as	Individuals.
	New	York:	Putnam.
————.	1985.	
Explorations	Into	the	Self
	London:	Academic	Press.
Hannah,	B.	1976.	
Jung,	His	Life	and	Work.
	New	York:	G.P.	Putnam’s	Sons.
Henderson,	J.	1990.	Cultural	attitudes	and	the	cultural	unconscious.	In
Shadow	and	Self.
	Wilmette,	IL.:	Chiron	Publications.
Hogenson,	G.	1994.	
Jung’s	Struggle	with	Freud
.	Wilmette:	Chiron
Publications
Jacobi,	J.	1943.	
The	Psychology	of	C.G.	Jung.
	New	Haven,	Conn.:	Yale
University	Press.
James,	W.	1902.	
Varieties	of	Religious	Experience.
	New	York:	Longmans,
Green,	and	Co.
————.	1950.	
The	Principles	of	Psychology.
	New	York:	Dover.
Jung,	C.G.	Except	as	below,	references	are	to	the	
Collected	Works	(CW)
	by
volume	and	paragraph	number.
————.	1961.	
Memories,	Dreams,	Reflections.
	New	York:	Random	House.

————.	1973.	
Letters,
	vol.	1.	Princeton:	Princeton	University	Press.
————.	1974.	
The	FreudlJung	Letters.
	Princeton:	Princeton	University
Press.
————.	1975.	
Letters,
	vol.	2.	Princeton:	Princeton	University	Press.
————.	1977.	C.G.	
Jung	Speaking.
	Princeton:	Princeton	University	Press.
————.	1983.	
The	Zofingia	Lectures.
	Princeton:	Princeton	University
Press.
————.	1991.	
Psychology	of	the	Unconscious.
	Princeton:	Princeton
University	Press.
Kerr,	J.	1993.	
A	Most	Dangerous	Method.
	New	York:	Knopf.
Maidenbaum,	A.	(ed.).	1991.	
Lingering	Shadows:	Jungians,	Freudians	and
Anti-Semitism.
	Boston:	Shambhala.
McGuire,	W.	(ed.)	1974.	
The	Freud/Jung	Letters.
	Princeton:	Princeton
University	Press.
Noll,	R.	1989.	Multiple	personality,	dissociation,	and	C.G.	Jung’s	complex
theory.	In	
Journal	of	Anaytical	Psychology
	34:4.
————.	1993.	Multiple	personality	and	the	complex	theory.	In	
Journal
	of
Analytical	Psychology	38:3.
————.	1994.	
The	Jung	Cult.
	Princeton:	Princeton	University	Press.
Rieff,	P.	1968.	
Triumph	of	the	Therapeutic
.	New	York:	Harper	and	Row.
Samuels,	A.	1992.	National	psychology,	National	Socialism,	and	analytical
psychology:	Reflections	on	Jung	and	anti-semitism,	Pts.	I,	II.	In	
Journal	of
Analytical	Psychology
	37:1	and	2.
————.	1993.	New	material	concerning	Jung,	anti-Semitism,	and	the
Nazis.	In	
Journal	of	Analytical	Psychology
	38:4,	pp.	463-470.
Satinover,	J.	1995.	Psychopharmacology	in	Jungian	practice.	In	
Jungian
Analysis
	(ed.	M.	Stein),	pp.	349-71.	LaSalle,	IL:	Open	Court.
Stevens,	A.	1982.	
Archetypes:	A	Natural	History	of	the	Self
	New	York:
William	Morrow	and	Co.
Stein,	M.	(ed.).	1995.	
Jung	on	Evil.
	Princeton:	Princeton	University	Press.
Tresan,	D.	1995.	Jungian	metapsychology	and	neurobiological	theory:
auspicious	correspondences.”	In	
IAAP	Congress	Proceedings
	1995.

Einsiedeln:	Daimon	Verlag.
von	Franz,	M.L.	1971.	The	inferior	function.	In	
Jung’s
	Typology.	Dallas:
Spring	Publications.
Wehr,	G.	1987.	
Jung,	A	Biography.
	Boston:	Shambhala.

Index
Abraham,	Karl
Adler,	Alfred
Alcoholics	Anonymous
amplification
analytical	psychology
anima	and	animus	(anima/us)	(see	
also
	
Jung:	on	anima	and	animus)
and	gender
in	ideal	psychological	development
and	psyche
and	shadow,	comparison	between
and	the	unconscious
Apollo	(space	rocket)
archetypes(
see	also
	Jung:	on	archetypes)
and	culture
Aristotle
Armstrong,	Neil
Augustine,	Saint
Beethoven,	Ludwig	van
behaviorism
Bergman,	Ingmar
Fanny	and	Alexander
Bergson,	Henri
Binswanger,	Ludwig
Blake,	William

Bleuler,	Eugen
Boehme,	Jakob
Carus,	C.	G.
Christianity
collective	unconscious
complex	psychology
complexes	(
see	also
	Jung:	on	complexes;	on	constellation)
collective
constellation	of
and	ego
formation	of
and	multiple	personality	disorder
personal
and	possession
Confucius
consciousness(
see	also
	
Jung:	on	consciousness)
development	of
opposite	of
depth	psychology
Ding	an	sich
Dostoevski,	Feodor
Crime	and	Punishment
Dr.	Jekyll	and	Mr.	Hyde
dreams,	constitution	of

Eckhart,	Meister
Eliot,	T.	S.
ego	(ego-consciousness)	(
see	also
	Jung:	on	the	ego)
Einstein,	Albert
Emerson,	Ralph	Waldo
Empedocles
the	Enlightenment
Erikson,	Erik
ESP	(extra	sensory	perception)
Faust
Flournoy,	Gustav
Fordham,	Frieda
Frazer,	Sir	James	George
Golden	Bough
Freud,	Sigmund
on	incest
The	Interpretation	of	Dreams
and	Jung
break	between
differences	between
influence	on
as	mechanistic
reductionism	of
on	sexuality
Totem	and	Taboo
on	transference
Froebe-Kapetyn,	Olga

Fuentes,	Carlos
Glenn,	John
Gnostics(
see	also
	Jung:	and	Gnosticism)
Goethe,	Johann	Wolfgang	von
Faust
Great	Depression
Haggard,	Rider
She
Hartmann,	Eduard	von
Hegel,	G.	W.	F.
Heine,	Heinrich
Heraclitus
Hinkle,	Beatrice
Hitler,	Adolf
I	Ching	(The	Book	of	Changes)
Iago
identification,	psychological
Jacobi,	Jolande
Jaffe,	Aniela
James,	William
Varieties	of	Religious	Experience
Janet,	Pierre
Jelliffe,	Smith	Ely

Johnson,	Lyndon
Jung,	Carl	Gustav
Aion
on	anima	and	projection
on	ego
on	self
on	underlying	motifs	in	history
on	anima	and	animus
as	archetypal
and	ego
as	fate
and	gender	issues
and	individuality
and	inner	development
and	Maya
and	persona,	difference	between
problems	of
and	projection
and	psyche
and	relationships
and	sexuality
and	the	shadow,	difference	between
and	the	“subject”
as	syzygy
and	transcendent	figures
as	transformative
on	archetypes
as	bridging	boundaries

consciousness	in
and	culture
and	ego
the	hero
in	history
and	instincts
mother-infant	pair
of	order
and	physical	world,	continuum	with
projections	of
as	psychic/nonpsychic
as	psychoid
and	religion,	theology
and	synchronicity
as	transgressive
on	attitude
autobiography	of
on	basic	drives
on	causality
in	psychology
as	challenging	boundaries
Collected	Works
on	compensation
on	complexes
and	archetypes
core	of
creation	of
and	disintegration,	dissociation

and	dreams
and	ego
and	energy
as	having	consciousness
and	image
modification	of
as	personality	fragments
and	poltergeists
and	possession
and	psyche
and	psychogalvanometers
as	quasi-instinctive
and	repressed	memories
on	consciousness
disturbances	of
five	stages	of
sixth	and	seventh	stages	of
on	constellation
on	culture
as	natural
on	death	wish
development	of
Diagnostische	Assoziationstudien	(Studies	in	Word	Association)
doctoral	dissertation	of
on	ego	(ego-consciousness)
and	autonomy
and	body
and	collisions

and	complexes
conflict	in
and	consciousness
core	of
development	of
and	freedom
and	identification
and	psyche
and	self-consciousness
as	setting	humans	apart
and	the	unconscious
on	enantiodromia
on	energic	and	mechanistic	views
on	energy(
see	also
	
Jung:	on	psychic	energy)
gradients	of
values	of
on	extraversion	and	introversion
on	free	will
and	Gnosticism
on	human	evolution
on	the	image	(imago)
on	incest
on	individuation
case	study	of
and	compensation
and	conflict	of	opposites
and	five	stages	of	consciousness
in	second	half	of	life

and	the	self
and	the	shadow
and	unity
as	wholeness
on	instinct
and	archetypes
and	psyche
Kundalini	Yoga	Seminar
on	libido
desexualization	of
dual	nature	of
progression	of
as	psychic	energy
regression	of
and	symbols
transformation	of
as	will
on	mandalas
on	mathematics
Memories,	Dreams,	Reflections
on	mind	and	body	(matter),	relation	between
on	modernity
Naturerkldrung	und	Psyche
	
(
The	Interpretation	of	Nature	and	the	Psyche
)
and	Nazi	Germany
on	numbers,	meaning	of
on	“objective	psyche”
on	the	paranormal
on	the	persona

and	adaptation
in	adolescence
and	birth	order
and	ego
and	identification
of	introverts	and	extroverts
and	objects
pitfalls	of
and	shadow
and	shame	and	guilt	cultures
sources	of
transformation	of
and	physics
“postmodern”	issues	in
on	projection
and	conscious	development
on	psyche	(soul)
and	archetype
and	body
and	collisions
and	complexes
complexity	of
and	dissociation
and	ego
hierarchy	in
and	image
and	instinct
limit	of

mapping	of
as	open	system
partie	inferieur
partie	superieur
and	sacrifice	of	satisfaction
somatic-spiritual	scale	of
and	space-time	continuum
and	the	spiritual	(
geistlich)
and	synchronicity
and	the	unconscious
and	the	world
on	psychic	energy
archetypes	as	source
regression	of
transformation	of
psychic	experiences	of
on	the	psychoid
as	psychological	lifespan	theorist
Psychological	Types
on	psychological	types
On	the	Psychology	and	Pathology	of	So-Called	Occult	Phenomena
The	Psychology	of	Dementia	Praecox
Psychology	of	the	Unconscious
“Red	Book”
scientific	empiricism	of
on	the	self	(Self)
and	anima/animus
as	archetype

diagrams	of
and	ego
as	empirical
as	God-image	(
imago	Dei
)
and	individuation
opposites	in
symbols	of
as	transcendent
as	unknown	knower
as	wholeness
on	sexual	motives,	transformation	of
on	the	shadow
creation	of
and	ego,	relation	between
and	evil
and	persona
and	projection
and	shame
on	the	soul	(
see
	Jung:	on	the	psyche)
sources	of	thought
on	subpersonalities
on	symbols
Symbols	of	Transformation
on	synchronicity
as	acausal
and	archetypes
and	clusters	of	events
and	compensation

and	continuity
definition	ofbroad	narrow
and	meaning
and	order
and	psyche
and	the	psychoid
and	relativity	theory
and	tension	of	opposites
theme	of	universality
and	theory	of	relativity
training	of
Two	Essays	in	Analytical	Psychology
on	the	unconscious
a	priori	knowledge	of
collective
and	complexes
and	family	environment
formative	elements	in
and	house	dream
modification	of
and	neurosis
as	predictable
sources	of
themes	in
and	verbal	stimuli
unified	vision	of
on	the	
unus	mundus
	(unified	cosmos)
Wandlungen	und	Symbolische	der	Libido	(PSychology	of	the	Unconscious
)

on	will
Word	Association	Experiment
The	Zofingia	Lectures
Jung	Institute
Kant,	Immanuel
Kennedy,	John	F.
Kepler,	Johannes
Lao-tsu
Levy-Bruhl,	Lucien
libido(
see	also
	Freud:	on	libido;	Jung:	on	libido)
Lorenz,	Konrad
Mahler,	Margaret
mandalas(
see	also
	Jung:	on	mandalas)
Mary	Magdalene
Mephistopheles
Mesmer,	Anton
Miller,	Miss	Frank
Mithraism
Moses	(biblical)
multiple	personality	disorder
and	complexes
and	ego
and	psyche-soma	connections

Nietzsche,	Friedrich
Also	Sprach	Zarathustra
nous
participation	mystique
(
see	also
	Jung:	on	consciousness,	five	stages	of)
Paul	(biblical)
Pauli,	Wolfgang
persona(
see	also
	Jung:	on	the	persona)
Philemon
Picasso,	Pablo
The	Picture	of	Dorian	Gray
Plato
possession
Preiswerk,	Helene
psyche	(soul)(
see	also
	
Jung:	on	the	psyche)
and	body
and	energy
as	uniquely	human
psychic	energy(
see	also
	
Jung:	on	psychic	energy)
Pythagorian	doctrines
Rauschenbach,	Emma
Rhine,	J.	B.
Rilke,	Rainer	Maria
Schiller,	Friedrich	von

Schopenhauer,	Arthur
Seelig,	Carl
Shakespeare,	William	
Othello
Socrates
soul	
(Seele)
	and	spirit	(
Geist
)
(
see	also
	Jung:	on	the
psyche)
Spielrein,	Sabina
Sputnik
Stalin,	Joseph
synchronicity.	
See
	Jung:	on	synchronicity
Talleyrand,	Charles	Maurice	de
Theseus
Tillich,	Paul
Tourette’s	Syndrome
unconscious(
see	also
	Jung:	on	the	unconscious)
Wagner,	Richard
Watson,	John	Broadus
White,	William	Alanson
Wilson,	William	G.
Wolff,	Toni
Wundt,	Wilhelm

Ziehen,	Theodor

To	order	books	from	Open	Court,	call	toll	free	1-800-815-2280,	or	visit	
www.opencourtbooks.com
.
	
	
Open	Court	Publishing	Company	is	a	division	of	Carus	Publishing	Company.
	
Copyright	©	1998	by	Carus	Publishing	Company.
	
First	printing	1998	
Second	printing	1998	
Third	printing	1999	
Fourth	printing	2001	
Fifth	printing	2003	
Sixth	printing	2004	
Seventh	printing	2004	
Eighth	printing	2005	
Ninth	printing	2006	
Tenth	printing	2007	
Eleventh	printing	2009	
Twelfth	printing	2010
	
All	rights	reserved.	No	part	of	this	publication	may	be	reproduced,	stored	in	a	retrieval	system,	or
transmitted,	in	any	form	or	by	any	means,	electronic,	mechanical,	photocopying,	recording,	or
otherwise,	without	the	prior	written	permission	of	the	publisher,	Open	Court	Publishing	Company,	315
Fifth	Street,	P.O.	Box	300,	Peru,	Illinois,	61354-0300.
	
Printed	and	bound	in	the	United	States	of	America.
	
Library	of	Congress	Cataloging-in-Publication	Data
	
Stein,	Murray,	1943—
Jung’s	map	of	the	soul:	an	introduction	/	Murray	Stein.
p.	cm.
Includes	bibliographical	references	and	index.
eISBN	:	978-0-812-69707-0

1.	Psychoanalysis.	2.	Jungian	psychology.	3.	Jung.	C.G.	(Carl	Gustav),	1875—1961	I.	Title
BF173.S	1998
150.19’34—dc21
97-51485
CIP

