Memories, Dreams,Reflectionsby C. G. JungRecorded And Edited By Aniela JafféTranslated From The German ByRichard and Clara WinstonREVISED EDITIONVINTAGE BOOKS

IntroductionHe looked at his own Soulwith a Telescope. What seemedall irregular, he saw andshewed to be beautifulConstellations; and he addedto the Consciousness hiddenworlds within worlds.Coleridge, NotebooksThis Book had its inception during the Eranos Conference held inAscona in the summer of 1956. There the publisher Kurt Wolff, inconversation with friends from Zurich, spoke of his wish to havePantheon Books of New Y ork publish a biography of Carl GustavIung. Dr. Jolande Jacobi, one of C. G.Jung's associates, proposedthat the office of biographer be entrusted to me.All of us were well aware that the task would by no means be aneasy one. Jung's distaste for exposing his personal life to the publiceye was well known, Indeed, he gave his consent only after a longperiod of doubt and hesitation. But once he had done so, heallotted to me an entire afternoon once a week for our worktogether. Considering the press of his regular program of work, andhow easily he tired--for even then he was past eighty--that was agreat deal of time.We began in the spring of 1957. It had been proposed that thebook be written not as a "biography," but in the form of an"autobiography ," with Jung himself as the narrator. This plandetermined the form of the book, and my first task consisted solelyin asking questions and noting down Jung's replies. Although hewas rather reticent at the beginning, he soon warmed to the work.He began telling about himself, his development, his dreams, and

his thoughts with growing interest.By the end of the year Jung's affirmative attitude toward our jointefforts led to a decisive step. After a period of inner turbulence,long-submerged images out of his childhood rose to the surface ofhis mind. He sensed their connection with ideas in the works hehad written in his old age, but could not grasp it clearly. Onemorning he informed me that he wanted to set down hisrecollections of his childhood directly. By this time he had alreadytold me a good many of his earliest memories, but there were stillgreat gaps in the story.This decision was as gratifying as it was unexpected, for I knewhow great a strain writing was for Jung. At his advanced age hewould not undertake anything of the sort unless he felt it was a"task" imposed on him from within. Here was evidence that the"autobiography" was justified in terms of Jung's own inner life.Some time after this new development, I noted down a remark ofhis: "A book of mine is always a matter of fate. There is somethingunpredictable about the process of writing, and I cannot prescribefor myself any predetermined course. Thus this 'autobiography' isnow taking a direction quite different from what I had imagined atthe beginning. It has become a necessity for me to write down myearly memories. If I neglect to do so for a single day, unpleasantphysical symptoms immediately follow. As soon as I set to workthey vanish and my head feels perfectly clear."In April 1958 Jung finished the three chapters on his childhood,school days, and years at the university. At first he called them, "Onthe Early Events of My Life." These chapters ended with thecompletion of his medical studies in 1900.This, however, was not the sole direct contribution that Jung made

to the book. In January 1959 he was at his country house inBollingen, He devoted every morning to reading chosen chapters ofour book, which had meanwhile been hammered into shape. Whenhe returned the chapter, "On Life after Death," he said to me,"Something within me has been touched. A gradient has formed,and I must write." Such was the origin of "Late Thoughts," in whichhe voiced his deepest and perhaps his most far-reachingconvictions.In the summer of that same year of 1959, likewise in Bollingen,Jung wrote the chapter on Kenya and Uganda. The section on thePueblo Indians is taken from an unpublished and unfinishedmanuscript that deals with general questions of the psychology ofprimitives.In order to complete the chapters "Sigmund Freud" and"Confrontation with the Unconscious," I incorporated a number ofpassages from a seminar delivered in 1925, in which Jung spokefor the first time of his inner development. The chapter "PsychiatricActivities" is based on conversations between Jung and the youngassistant doctors of the Zurich mental hospital of Burgholzli in 1956.At that time one of his grandsons was working as a psychiatristthere. The conversations took place in Jung's house in Kusnacht.Jung read through the manuscript of this book and approved it.Occasionally he corrected passages or added new material. In turn,I have used the records of our conversations to supplement thechapters he wrote himself, have expanded his sometimes terseallusions, and have eliminated repetitions. The further the bookprogressed, the closer became the fusion between his work andmine.The genesis of the book to some extent determined its contents.Conversation or spontaneous narration is inevitably casual, and that

tone has carried over to the entire "autobiography." The chaptersare rapidly moving beams of light that only fleetingly illuminate theoutward events of Jung's life and work. In recompense, theytransmit the atmosphere of his intellectual world and the experienceof a man to whom the psyche was a profound reality. I often askedJung for specific data on outward happenings, but I asked in vain.Only the spiritual essence of his life's experience remained in hismemory, and this alone seemed to him worth the effort of telling.Far more signifcant than the difficulties of formal organization of thetext were those prior obstacles, of a more personal kind, to whichJung refers in a letter to a friend of his student days. Replying to arequest, in the latter part of 1957, to set down the memories of hisyouth, he wrote:"... Y ou are quite right. When we are old, we are drawn back, bothfrom within and from without, to memories of youth. Once before,some thirty years ago, my pupils asked me for an account of how Iarrived at my conceptions of the unconscious. I fulfilled this requestby giving a seminar.[1] During the last years the suggestion hascome to me from various quarters that I should do something akinto an autobiography. I have been unable to conceive of my doinganything of the sort. I know too many autobiographies, with theirself-deceptions and downright lies, and I know too much about theimpossibility of self-portrayal, to want to venture on any suchattempt."Recently I was asked for autobiographical information, and in thecourse of answering some questions I discovered hidden in mymemories certain objective problems which seem to call for closerexamination. I have therefore weighed the matter and come to theconclusion that I shall fend off other obligations long enough to takeup the very first beginnings of my life and consider them in anobjective fashion. This task has proved so difficult and singular thatin order to go ahead with it, I have had to promise myself that the

results would not be published in my lifetime. Such a promiseseemed to me essential in order to assure for myself the necessarydetachment and calm. It became clear that all the memories whichhave remained vivid to me had to do with emotional experiencesthat arouse uneasiness and passion in the mind--scarcely the bestcondition for an objective account! Y our letter 'naturally' came at thevery moment when I had virtually resolved to take the plunge.1 The 1925 seminar mentioned earlier."Fate will have it--and this has always been the case with me---thatall the 'outer' aspects of my life should be accidental. Only what isinterior has proved to have substance and a determining value. Asa result, all memory of outer events has faded, and perhaps these'Outer' experiences were never so very essential anyhow, or wereso only in that they coincided with phases of my inner development.An enormous part of these "outer' manifestations of my life hasvanished from my memory --for the very reason, so it has seemedto me, that I participated in them with all my energies. Y et these arethe very things that make up a sensible biography: persons one hasmet, travels, adventures, entanglements, blows of destiny, and soon. But with few exceptions all these things have become for mephantasms which I barely recollect and which my mind has nodesire to reconstruct, for they no longer stir my imagination."On the other hand, my recollection of 'inner' experiences has grownall the more vivid and colorful. This poses a problem of descriptionwhich I scarcely feel able to cope with, at least for the present.Unfortunately, I cannot, for these reasons, fulfill your request, greatlyas I regret my inability to do so.... "This letter characterizes Jung's attitude. Although he had already"resolved to take the plunge," the letter ends with a refusal. T o theday of his death the conflict between affirmation and rejection was

never entirely settled. There always remained a residue ofskepticism, a shying away from his future readers. He did notregard these memoirs as a scientific work, nor even as a book byhimself. Rather, he always spoke and wrote of it as "Aniela Jaffé'sproject," to which he had made contributions. At his specificrequest it is not to be included in his Collected Works.Jung has been particularly reticent in speaking of his encounterswith people, both public figures and close friends and relatives. "Ihave spoken with many famous men of my time, the great ones inscience and politics, with explorers, artists and writers, princes andfinancial magnates; but if I am to be honest I must say that only afew such encounters have been significant experiences for me. Ourmeetings were like those of ships on the high seas, when they diptheir flags to one another. Usually, too, these persons hadsomething to ask of me which I am not at liberty to divulge. Thus Ihave retained no memories of them, however important thesepersons may be in the eyes of the world. Our meetings were withoutportent; they soon faded away and bore no deeper consequences.But of those relationships which were vital to me, and which cameto me like memories of far-off times, I cannot speak, for they pertainnot only to my innermost life but also to that of others. It is not for meto fling open to the public eye doors that are closed forever. "The paucity of outward events is, however, amply compensated bythe account of Jung's inner experiences, and by a rich harvest ofthoughts which, as he himself says, are an integral part of hisbiography. This is true first and foremost of his religious ideas, forthis book contains Jung's religious testament.Jung was led to a confrontation with religious questions by anumber of different routes. There were his childhood visions, whichbrought him face to face with the reality of religious experience andremained with him to the end of his life. There was his

insuppressible curiosity concerning everything that had to do withthe contents of the psyche and its manifestations--the urge to knowwhich characterized his scientific work. And, last but not least, therewas his conscience as a physician. Jung regarded himself primarilyas a doctor, a psychiatrist. He was well aware that the patient'sreligious attitude plays a crucial part in the therapy of psychicillnesses. This observation coincided with his discovery that thepsyche spontaneously produces images with a religious content,that it is "by nature religious." It also became apparent to him thatnumerous neuroses spring from a disregard for this fundamentalcharacteristic of the psyche, especially during the second half oflife.Jung's concept of religion differed in many respects from traditionalChristianity--above all in his answer to the problem of evil and hisconception of a God who is not entirely good or kind. From theviewpoint of dogmatic Christianity, Jung was distinctly an"outsider." For all his world-wide fame, this verdict was forciblyborne in upon him by the reactions to his writings. This grieved him,and here and there in this book he expresses the disappointment ofan investigator who felt that his religious ideas were not properlyunderstood. More than once he said grimly, "They would haveburned me as a heretic in the Middle Agesl" Only since his deathhave theologians in increasing numbers begun to say that Jung wasindubitably an outstanding figure in the religious history of ourcentury.Jung explicitly declared his allegiance to Christianity, and the mostimportant of his works deal with the religious problems of theChristian. He looked at these questions from the standpoint ofpsychology, deliberately setting a bound between it and thetheological approach. In so doing he stressed the necessity ofunderstanding and reflecting, as against the Christian demand forfaith. He took this necessity for granted, as one of the essential

features of life. "I find that all my thoughts circle around God like theplanets around the sun, and are as irresistibly attracted by Him. Iwould feel it to be the grossest sin if I were to oppose anyresistance to this force," he wrote in 1952, to a young clergyman.This book is the only place in his extensive writings in which Jungspeaks of God and his personal experience of God. While he waswriting of his youthful rebellion against the church, he once said, "Atthat time I realized that God--for me, at least--was one of the mostimmediate experiences? In his scientific works Jung seldomspeaks of God; there he is at pains to use the term "the God-imagein the human psyche." This is no contradiction. In the one case hislanguage is subjective, based upon inner experience; in the other itis the objective language of scientific inquiry . In the first case he isspeaking as an individual, whose thoughts are influenced bypassionate, powerful feelings, intuitions, and experiences of a longand unusually rich life; in the second, he is speaking as the scientistwho consciously restricts himself to what may be demonstrated andsupported by evidence. As a scientist, Jung is an empiricist.When Jung speaks of his religious experiences in this book, he isassuming that his readers are willing to enter into his point of view.His subjective statements will be acceptable only to those who havehad similar experiences--or, to put it another way, to those in whosepsyche the God-image bears the same or similar features.The chapter entitled "The Work," with its brief survey of the genesisof Jung's most important writings, is fragmentary. How could this beotherwise, when his collected works comprise nearly twentyvolumes? Moreover, Jung never felt any disposition to offer asummary of his ideas--either in conversation or in writing. When hewas asked to do so, he replied in his characteristic, rather drasticfashion, "That sort of thing lies totally outside my range. I see nosense in publishing a condensation of papers in which I went to so

much trouble to discuss the subject in detail. I should have to omitall my evidence and rely on a type of categorical statement whichwould not make my results any easier to understand. Thecharacteristic ruminant activity of ungulate animals, which consistsin the regurgitation of what has already been chewed over, isanything but stimulating to my appetite.... "The reader should therefore regard this chapter as a retrospectivesketch written in response to a special occasion, and not expect itto be comprehensive.The short glossary which I have included at the end of the book, atthe publisher's request, will, I hope, be of help to the reader who isnot familiar with Jung's work and terminology. I have taken a smallnumber of the definitions from the Worterbuck der Psychologie undihrer Grenzgebiete, with the kind permission of its editor, Kurt vonSury , M.D. Wherever possible I have elucidated the concepts ofJungian psychology by quotations from Jung's works, and havesupplemented the dictionary's definitions in the same way. Thesequotations must, however, be regarded as no more than suggestivehints. Jung was constantly defining his concepts in new anddifferent ways, for an ultimate definition, he felt, was not possible.He thought it wise to let the inexplicable elements that always clingto psychic realities remain as riddles or mysteries.A great many persons have helped me with this inspiring anddifficult task, have shown unfailing interest during the slow growth ofthe book, and have furthered its progress by stimulatingsuggestions and criticism. T o all of them I offer heartfelt thanks.Here I shall mention by name only Helen and Kurt Wolff, of Locarno,who conceived the idea of the book and helped to bring that idea tofruition; Marianne and Walther Niehus-Jung, of Kusnacht-Zurich,who throughout the years in which it was taking shape aided me byword and deed; and B. F. C. Hull, of Palma de Mallorca, who gave

me advice and help with unflagging patience.Aniela JarréDecember 1961

ContentsPrologue I First YearsII School YearsIII Student YearsIV Psychiatric ActivitiesV Sigmund FreudVI Confrontation with the UnconsciousVII The Work VIII The TowerIX  Travelsi. North Africaii. America.- The Pueblo Indiansiii. Kenya and Ugandaiv. India v . Rav enna and RomeX V i s i onsXI On Li fe aft er Deat hXII Lat e Thought sRetrospectAppendixi. Letters from Freud to Jungii. Letters to Emma Jung from Americaiii. Letter to Emma Jung from North Africaiv. Richard Wilhelmv.  Sept em Sermones  ad Mort uos  GlossaryThe Collected Works of C. G. JungMemories, Dreams, Reflections

PrologueMY LIFE is a story of the self-realization of the unconscious.Everything in the unconscious seeks outward manifestation, and thepersonality too desires to evolve out of its unconscious conditionsand to experience itself as a whole. I cannot employ the language ofscience to trace this process of growth in myself, for I cannotexperience myself as a scientific problem.What we are to our inward vision, and what man appears to be subspecie aeternitatis, can only be expressed by way of myth. Myth ismore individual and expresses life more precisely than doesscience. Science works with concepts of averages which are fartoo general to do justice to the subjective variety of an individual life.Thus it is that I have now undertaken, in my eighty-third year, to tellmy personal myth. I can only make direct statements, only "tellstories." Whether or not the stories are "true" is not the problem.The only question is whether what I tell is my fable, my truth.An autobiography is so difficult to write because we possess nostandards, no objective foundation, from which to judge ourselves.There are really no proper bases for comparison. I know that inmany things I am not like others, but I do not know what I really amlike. Man cannot compare himself with any other creature; he is nota monkey, not a cow, not a tree. I am a man. But what is it to bethat? Like every other being, I am a splinter of the infinite deity, but Icannot contrast myself with any animal, any plant or any stone. Onlya mythical being has a range greater than man's. How then can aman form any definite opinions about himself?We are a psychic process which we do not control, or only partly

direct. Consequently, we cannot have any final judgment aboutourselves or our lives. If we had, we would know everything--but atmost that is only a pretense. At bottom we never know how it has allcome about. The story of a life begins somewhere, at someparticular point we happen to remember; and even then it wasalready highly complex. We do not know how life is going to turnout. Therefore the story has no beginning, and the end can only bevaguely hinted at.The life of man is a dubious experiment. It is a tremendousphenomenon only in numerical terms. Individually, it is so fleeting,so insufficient, that it is literally a miracle that anything can exist anddevelop at all. I was impressed by that fact long ago, as a youngmedical student, and it seemed to me miraculous that I should nothave been prematurely annihilated.Life has always seemed to me like a plant that lives on its rhizome.Its true life is invisible, hidden in the rhizome. The part that appearsabove ground lasts only a single summer. Then it withers away--anephemeral apparition. When we think of the unending growth anddecay of life and civilizations, we cannot escape the impression ofabsolute nullity. Y et I have never lost a sense of something that livesand endures underneath the eternal flux. What we see is theblossom, which passes. The rhizome remains.In the end the only events in my life worth telling are those when theimperishable world irrupted into this transitory one. That is why Ispeak chiefly of inner experiences, amongst which I include mydreams and visions. These form the prima materia of my scientificwork. They were the fiery magma out of which the stone that had tobe worked was crystallized.All other memories of travels, people and my surroundings havepaled beside these interior happenings. Many people have

participated in the story of our times and written about it; if thereader wants an account of that, let him turn to them or getsomebody to tell it to him. Recollection of the outward events of mylife has largely faded or disappeared. But my encounters with the"other" reality , my bouts with the unconscious, are indeliblyengraved upon my memory. In that realm there has always beenwealth in abundance, and everything else has lost importance bycomparison.Similarly , other people are established inalienably in my memoriesonly if their names were entered in the scrolls of my destiny from thebeginning, so that encountering them was at the same time a kindof recollection.Inner experiences also set their seal on the outward events thatcame my way and assumed importance for me in youth or later on. Iearly arrived at the insight that when no answer comes from withinto the problems and complexities of life, they ultimately mean verylittle. Outward circumstances are no substitute for inner experience.Therefore my life has been singularly poor in outward happenings. Icannot tell much about them, for it would strike me as hollow andinsubstantial. I can understand myself only in the light of innerhappenings. It is these that make up the singularity of my life, andwith these my autobiography deals.

1First YearsWHEN I was six months old, my parents moved from Kesswil onLake Constance to Laufen, the castle and vicarage above the Fallsof the Rhine. This was in 1875. My memories begin with my secondor third year. I recall the vicarage, the garden, the laundry house, thechurch, the castle, the Falls, the small castle of Worth, and thesexton's farm. These are nothing but islands of memory afloat in asea of vagueness, each by itself, apparently with no connectionbetween them. One memory comes up which is perhaps theearliest of my life, and is indeed only a rather hazy impression. I amlying in a pram, in the shadow of a tree. It is a fine, warm summerday, the sky blue, and golden sunlight darting through green leaves.The hood of the pram has been left up. I have just awakened to theglorious beauty of the day, and have a sense of indescribable well-being. I see the sun glittering through the leaves and blossoms ofthe bushes. Everything is wholly wonderful, colorful, and splendid.Another memory: I am sitting in our dining room, on the west side ofthe house, perched in a high chair and spooning up warm milk withbits of broken bread in it. The milk has a pleasant taste and acharacteristic smell. This was the first time I became aware of thesmell of milk. It was the moment when, so to speak, I becameconscious of smelling. This memory, too, goes very far back.Still another: a lovely summer evening. An aunt said to me, "Now Iam going to show you something." She took me out in front of thehouse, on the road to Dachsen. On the far horizon the chain of the

Alps lay bathed in glowing sunset reds. The Alps could be seenvery clearly that evening. "Now look over there"--I can hear hersaying to me in Swiss dialect---"the mountains are all red." For thefirst time I consciously saw the Alps. Then I was told that the nextday the village children would be going on a school outing to theUetliberg, near Zurich. I wanted so much to go too. To my sorrow, Iwas informed that children as small as I could not go along, therewas nothing to be done about it. From then on the Uetliberg andZurich became an unattainable land of dreams, near to the glowing,snow- covered mountains.From a somewhat later period comes another memory. My mothertook me to the Thurgau to visit friends, who had a castle on LakeConstance. I could not be dragged away from the water. The wavesfrom the steamer washed up to the shore, the sun glistened on thewater, and the sand under the water had been curled into littleridges by the waves. The lake stretched away and away into thedistance. This expanse of water was an inconceivable pleasure tome, an incomparable splendor. At that time the idea became fixedin my mind that I must live near a lake; without water, I thought,nobody could live at all.Still another memory comes up: strangers, bustle, excitement. Themaid comes running and exclaims, "The fishermen have found acorpse--came down the Falls--they want to put it in the washhousel"My father says, "Y es, yes." I want to see the dead body at once. Mymother holds me back and sternly forbids me to go into the garden.When all the men had left, I quickly stole into the garden to thewashhouse. But the door was locked. I went around the house; atthe back there was an open drain running down the slope, and I sawblood and water trickling out. I found this extraordinarily interesting.At that time I was not yet four years old.Ye t  a no t he r  i m a g e :  I a m  r e s t i ve ,  f e ve r i s h,  una b le  t o  s le e p .  M y f a t he r

carries me in his arms, paces up and down, singing his old studentsongs. I particularly remember one I was especially fond of andwhich always used to soothe me, "Alles schweige, jeder neige ..."The beginning went something like that. To this day I can remembermy father's voice, singing over me in the stillness of the night.I was suffering, so my mother told me afterward, from generaleczema. Dim intimations of trouble in my parents' marriagehovered around me. My illness, in 1878, must have been connectedwith a temporary separation of my parents. My mother spentseveral months in a hospital in Basel, and presumably her illnesshad something to do with the difficulty in the marriage. An aunt ofmine, who was a spinster and some twenty years older than mymother, took care of me. I was deeply troubled by my mother'sbeing away. From then on, I always felt mistrustful when the word"love" was spoken. The feeling I associated with "woman" was for along time that of innate unreliability. "Father," on the other hand,meant reliability and powerlessness. That is the handicap I startedoff with. Later, these early impressions were revised: I have trustedmen friends and been disappointed by them, and I have mistrustedwomen and was not disappointed.While my mother was away, our maid, too, looked after me. I stillremember her picking me up and laying my head against hershoulder. She had black hair and an olive complexion, and wasquite different from my mother. I can see, even now, her hairline, herthroat, with its darkly pigmented skin, and her ear. All this seemedto me very strange and yet strangely familiar. It was as though shebelonged not to my family but only to me, as though she wereconnected in some way with other mysterious things I could notunderstand. This type of girl later became a component of myanimal. The feeling of strangeness which she conveyed, and yet ofhaving known her always, was a characteristic of that figure whichlater came to symbolize for me the whole essence of womanhood.

1 For this and other technical terms which are commonly used by Jung butmay be unfamiliar to the reader or no longer fresh in his mind, see theglossary at the end of the book.From the period of my parents' separation I have another memoryimage: a young, very pretty and charming girl with blue eyes and fairhair is leading me, on a blue autumn day, under golden maple andchestnut trees along the Rhine below the Falls, near Worth castle.The sun is shining through the foliage, and yellow leaves lie on theground. This girl later became my mother-in-law. She admired myfather. I did not see her again until I was twenty-one years old.These are my outward memories. What follow now are morepowerful, indeed overwhelming images, some of which I recall onlydimly. There was a fall downstairs, for example, and another fallagainst the angle of a stove leg. I remember pain and blood, adoctor sewing a wound in my head--the scar remained visible untilmy senior year at the Gymnasium. My mother told me, too, of thetime when I was crossing the bridge over the Rhine Falls toNeuhausen. The maid caught me just in time--I already had one legunder the railing and was about to slip through. These things pointto an unconscious suicidal urge or, it may be, to a fatal resistanceto life in this world.At that time I also had vague fears at night. I would hear thingswalking about in the house. The muted roar of the Rhine Falls wasalways audible, and all around lay a danger zone. People drowned,bodies were swept over the rocks. In the cemetery nearby, thesexton would dig a hole--heaps of brown, upturned earth. Black,solemn men in long frock coats with unusually tall hats and shinyblack boots would bring a black box. My father would be there in hisclerical gown, speaking in a resounding voice. Women wept. I wastold that someone was being buried in this hole in the ground.

Certain persons who had been around previously would suddenlyno longer be there. Then I would hear that they had been buried,and that Lord Jesus had taken them to himself.My mother had taught me a prayer which I had to say every evening.I gladly did so because it gave me a sense of comfort in face of thevague uncertainties of the night:Spread out thy wings, Lord Jesus mild,And take to thee thy chick, thy child."If Satan would dev our it, No harm shall overpower it,"So let the angels sing! "[2] 2 Breit' aus die Fluglein beide, O Jesu meine FreudeUnd nimm dein Kuchlein ein.Will Satan es verschlingen,Dann lass die Engel singen:Dies Kind soll unverletzet sein.Lord Jesus was comforting, a nice, benevolent gentleman like HerrWegenstein up at the castle, rich, powerful, respected, and mindfulof little children at night. Why he should be winged like a bird was aconundrum that did not worry me any further. Far more significantand thought-provoking was the fact that little children werecompared to chicks which Lord Jesus evidently "took" reluctantly,like bitter medicine. This was difficult to understand. But Iunderstood at once that Satan liked chicks and had to be preventedfrom eating them. So, although Lord Jesus did not like the taste, heate them anyway, so that Satan would not get them.. As far as thatwent, my argument was comforting. But now I was hearing that LordJesus "took" other people to himself as well, and that this "taking"was the same as putting them in a hole in the ground.This sinister analogy had unfortunate consequences. I began to

distrust Lord Jesus. He lost the aspect of a big, comforting,benevolent bird and became associated with the gloomy black menin frock coats, top hats, and shiny black boots who busiedthemselves with the black box.These ruminations of mine led to my first conscious trauma. Onehot summer day I was sitting alone, as usual, on the road in front ofthe house, playing in the sand. The road led past the house up a hill,then disappeared in the wood on the hilltop. So from the house youcould see a stretch of the road. Looking up, I saw a figure in astrangely broad hat and a long black garment coming down fromthe wood. It looked like a man wearing women's clothes. Slowly thefigure drew nearer, and I could now see that it really was a manwearing a kind of black robe that reached to his feet. At the sight ofhim I was overcome with fear, which rapidly grew into deadly terroras the frightful recognition shot through my mind: "That is a Jesuit."Shortly before, I had overheard a conversation between my fatherand a visiting colleague concerning the nefarious activities of theJesuits. From the half-irritated, half-fearful tone of my father'sremarks I gathered that "Jesuits" meant something speciallydangerous, even for my father- Actually I had no idea what Jesuitswere, but I was familiar with the word "Jesus" from my little prayer.The man coming down the road must be in disguise, I thought; thatwas why he wore women's clothes. Probably he had evil intentions.Te r r i f i e d ,  I r a n he l t e r - - s k e l t e r  i nt o  t he  ho us e ,  r us he d  up  t he  s t a i r s ,and hid under a beam in the darkest corner of the attic. I don't knowhow long I remained there, but it must have been a fairly long time,because, when I ventured down again to the first floor andcautiously stuck my head out of the window, far and wide there wasnot a trace of the black figure to be seen. For days afterward thehellish fright clung to my limbs and kept me in the house. And evenwhen I began to play in the road again, the wooded hilltop was stillthe object of my uneasy vigilance. Later I realized, of course, that

the black figure was a harmless Catholic priest.At about the same time--I could not say with absolute certaintywhether it preceded this experience or not--I had the earliest dreamI can remember, a dream which was to preoccupy me all my life. Iwas then between three and four years old. The vicarage stoodquite alone near Laufen castle, and there was a big meadowstretching back from the sexton's farm. In the dream I was in thismeadow. Suddenly I discovered a dark, rectangular, stone-linedhole in the ground. I had never seen it before. I ran forward curiouslyand peered down into it. Then I saw a stone stairway leading down.Hesitantly and fearfully, I descended. At the bottom was a doorwaywith a round arch, closed off by a green curtain. It was a big, heavycurtain of worked stuff like brocade, and it looked very sumptuous.Curiaous to see what might be hidden behind, I pushed it aside. Isaw before me in the dim light a rectangular chamber about thirtyfeet long. The ceiling was arched and of hewn stone. The floor waslaid with flagstones, and in the center a red carpet ran from theentrance to a low platform. On this platform stood a wonderfully richgolden throne. I am not certain, but perhaps a red cushion lay on theseat. It was a magnificent throne, a real king's throne in a fairy tale.Something was standing on it which I thought at first was a treetrunk twelve to fifteen feet high and about one and a half to two feetthick. It was a huge thing, reaching almost to the ceiling. But it wasof a curious composition: it was made of skin and naked flesh, andon top there was something like a rounded head with no face andno hair. On the very top of the head was a single eye, gazingmotionlessly upward.It was fairly light in the room, although there were no windows andno apparent source of light. Above the head, however, was an auraof brightness. The thing did not move, yet I had the feeling that itmight at any moment crawl off the throne like a worm and creep

toward me. I was paralyzed with terror. At that moment I heard fromoutside and above me my mother's voice. She called out, "Y es, justlook at him. That is the man-eater!" That intensified my terror stillmore, and I awoke sweating and scared to death. For many nightsafterward I was afraid to go to sleep, because I feared I might haveanother dream like that.This dream haunted me for years. Only much later did I realize thatwhat I had seen was a phallus, and it was decades before Iunderstood that it was a ritual phallus. I could never make outwhether my mother meant, "This is the man-eater," or, "That is theman-eater." In the first case she would have meant that not LordJesus or the Jesuit was the devourer of little children, but thephallus; in the second case that the "man-eater" in general wassymbolized by the phallus, so that the dark Lord Jesus, the Jesuit,and the phallus were identical.The abstract significance of the phallus is shown by the fact that itwas enthroned by itself, "ithyphallically" (upright) The hole in themeadow probably represented a grave. The grave itself was anunderground temple whose green curtain symbolized the meadow,in other words the mystery of Earth with her covering of greenvegetation. The carpet was blood-red. What about the vault?Perhaps I had already been to the Munot, the citadel ofSchaffhausen? This is not likely , since no one would take a three-year-old child up there. So it cannot be a memory-trace. Equally, Ido not know where the anatomically correct phallus can have comefrom. The interpretation of the orificium urethrae as an eye, with thesource of light apparently above it, points to the etymology of theword phallus (shining, bright).[3]At all events, the phallus of this dream seems to be a subterraneanGod "not to be named," and such it remained throughout my youth,reappearing whenever anyone spoke too emphatically about Lord

Jesus. Lord Jesus never became quite real for me, never quiteacceptable, never quite lovable, for again and again I would think ofhis underground counterpart, a frightful revelation which had beenaccorded me without my seeking it. The Jesuit's "disguise" cast itsshadow over the Christian doctrine I had been taught. Often itseemed to me a solemn masquerade, a kind of funeral at which themourners put on serious or mournful faces but the next momentwere secretly laughing and not really sad at all. Lord Jesus seemedto me in some ways a god of death, helpful, it is true, in that hescared away the terrors of the night, but himself uncanny, a crucifiedand bloody corpse. Secretly, his love and kindness, which I alwaysheard praised, appeared doubtful to me, chiefly because thepeople who talked most about "dear Lord Jesus" wore black frockcoats and shiny black boots which reminded me of burials. Theywere my father's colleagues as well as eight of my uncles-allparsons. For many years they inspired fear in me--not to speak ofoccasional Catholic priests who reminded me of the terrifyingJesuit who had irritated and even alarmed my father. In later yearsand until my confirmation, I made every effort to force myself to takethe required positive attitude to Christ. But I could never succeed inovercoming my secret distrust.The fear of the "black man," which is felt by every child, was not theessential thing in that experience; it was, rather, the recognition thatstabbed through my childish brain: "That is a Jesuit." So theimportant thing in the dream was its remarkable symbolic settingand the astounding interpretation: "That is the man-eater." Not thechild's ogre of a man-eater, but the fact that this was the man-eater,and that it was sitting on a golden throne beneath the earth. For mychildish imagination it was first of all the king who sat on a goldenthrone; then, on a much more beautiful and much higher and muchmore golden throne far, far away in the blue sky, sat God and LordJesus, with golden crowns and white robes. Y et from this same

Lord Jesus came the "Jesuit," in black women's garb, with a broadblack hat, down from the wooded hill. I had to glance up there everyso often to see whether another danger might not be approaching.In the dream I went down into the hole in the earth and foundsomething very different on a golden throne, something non-humanand underworldly, which gazed fixedly upward and fed on humanflesh. It was only fifty years later that a passage in a study ofreligious ritual burned into my eyes, concerning the motif ofcannibalism that underlies the symbolism of the Mass. Only then didit become clear to me how exceedingly unchild-like, howsophisticated and oversophisticated was the thought that hadbegun to break through into consciousness in those twoexperiences. Who was it speaking in me? Whose mind haddevised them? What kind of superior intelligence was at work? Iknow every numbskull will babble on about "black man," "man-eater," "chance," and "retrospective interpretation," in order tobanish something terribly inconvenient that might sully the familiarpicture of childhood innocence. Ah, these good, efficient, healthy-minded people, they always remind me of those optimistic tadpoleswho bask in a puddle in the sun, in the shallowest of waters,crowding together and amiably wriggling their tails, totally unawarethat the next morning the puddle will have dried up and left themstranded.Who spoke to me then? Who talked of problems far beyond myknowledge? Who brought the Above and Below together, and laidthe foundation for everything that was to fill the second half of my lifewith stormiest passion? Who but that alien guest who came bothfrom above and from below?Through this childhood dream I was initiated into the secrets of theearth. What happened then was a kind of burial in the earth, andmany years were to pass before I came out again. T oday I knowthat it happened in order to bring the greatest possible amount of

light into the darkness. It was an initiation into the realm ofdarkness. My intellectual life had its unconscious beginnings at thattime.I no longer remember our move to Klein-Huningen, near Basel, in1879. But I do have a memory of something that happened severalyears later. One evening my father took me out of bed and carriedme in his arms to our porch, which faced west. He showed me theevening sky, shimmering in the most glorious green. That was afterthe eruption of Krakatoa, in 1883. Another time my father took meoutside and showed me a large comet on the eastem horizon.And once there was a great flood. The river Wiese, which flowedthrough the village, had broken its dam, and in its upper reaches abridge had collapsed. Fourteen people were drowned and werecarried down by the yellow flood water to the Rhine. When the waterretreated, some of the corpses got stuck in the sand. When I wastold about it, there was no holding me. I actually found the body of amiddle-aged man, in a black frock coat; apparently he had justcome from church. He lay half covered by sand, his arm over hiseyes. Similarly, I was fascinated to watch a pig being slaughtered.To  t he  ho r r o r  o f  m y m o t he r,  I wa t c he d  t he  who l e  p r o c e d ur e .  S hethought it terrible, but the slaughtering and the dead man weresimply matters of interest to me.My earliest memories of art go back to those years at Klein-Huningen. The house where my parents lived was the eighteenth-century parsonage, and in it there was a dark room. Here all thefurniture was good, and old paintings hung on the walls. I particularlyremember an Italian painting of David and Goliath. It was a mirrorcopy from the workshop of Guido Reni; the original hangs in theLouvre. How it came into our family I do not know. There wasanother old painting in that room which now hangs in my son'shouse: a landscape of Basel dating from the early nineteenth

century. Often I would steal into that dark, sequestered room and sitfor hours in front of the pictures, gazing at all this beauty. It was theonly beautiful thing I knew.About that time--I must still have been a very little fellow, no morethan six years old--an aunt took me to Basel and showed me thestuffed animals in the museum. We stayed a long time, because Iwanted to look at everything very carefully. At four O'clock the bellrang, a sign that the museum was about to close. My aunt naggedat me, but I could not tear myself away from the showcases. In themeantime the room had been locked, and we had to go by anotherway to the staircase, through the gallery of antiquities. Suddenly Iwas standing before these marvelous figures! Utterly overwhelmed,I opened my eyes wide, for I had never seen anything so beautiful. Icould not look at them long enough. My aunt pulled me by the handto the exit--I trailing always a step behind her--crying out,"Disgusting boy , shut your eyes; disgusting boy , shut your eyes!"Only then did I see that the figures were naked and wore fig leaves.I hadn't noticed it at all before. Such was my first encounter with thefine arts. My aunt was simmering with indignation, as though shehad been dragged through a pornographic institute. When I was sixyears old, my parents took me on an excursion to Arlesheim. Onthis occasion my mother wore a dress I have never forgotten, and itis the only dress of hers that I can recall: it was of some black stuffprinted all over with little green crescents. My earliest recollection ofmy mother is of a slender young woman wearing this dress. In all myother memories she is older and corpulent.We came to a church, and my mother said, "That is a Catholicchurch." My curiosity, mingled with fear, prompted me to slip awayfrom my mother and peer through the open door into the interior. Ijust had time to glimpse the big candles on a richly adorned altar (itwas around Easter) when I suddenly stumbled on a step and struckmy chin on a piece of iron. I remember that I had a gash that was

bleeding badly when my parents picked me up. My state of mindwas curious: on the one hand I was ashamed because my screamswere attracting the attention of the churchgoers, and on the otherhand I felt that I had done something forbidden. "Jesuits--greencurtain--secret of the man-eater.... So that is the Catholic Churchwhich has to do with Jesuits. It is their fault that I stumbled andscreamed."For years afterward I was unable to set foot inside a Catholicchurch without a secret fear of blood and falling and Jesuits. Thatwas the aura or atmosphere that hung about it, but at the same timeit always fascinated me. The proximity of a Catholic priest mademe even more uneasy, if that were possible. Not until I was in mythirties was I able to confront Mater Ecclesia without this sense ofoppression. The first time was in St. Stephen's Cathedral in Vienna.Soon after I was six my father began giving me Latin lessons, and Ialso went to school. I did not mind school; it was easy for me, sinceI was always ahead of the others and had learned to read before Iwent there. However, I remember a time when I could not yet read,but pestered my mother to read aloud to me out of the Orbis Pictus,an old, richly illustrated children's book, which contained an accountof exotic religions, especially that of the Hindus. There wereillustrations of Brahma, Vishnu, and Shiva which I found aninexhaustible source of interest. My mother later told me that Ialways returned to these pictures.Whenever I did so, I had an obscure feeling of their affinity with my"original revelation"--which I never spoke of to anyone. It was asecret I must never betray. Indirectly, my mother confirmed thisfeeling, for the faint tone of contempt with which she spoke of"heathens" did not escape me. I knew that she would reject my"revelation" with horror, and I did not want to expose myself to anysuch injury.

This unchildlike behavior was connected on the one hand with anintense sensitivity and vulnerability , on the other hand--and thisespecially--with the loneliness of my early youth. (My sister was bornnine years after me.) I played alone, and in my own way.Unfortunately I cannot remember what I played; I recall only that I didnot want to be disturbed. I was deeply absorbed in my games andcould not endure being watched or judged while I played them. Myfirst concrete memory of games dates from my seventh or eighthyear. I was passionately fond of playing with bricks, and built towerswhich I then rapturously destroyed by an "earthquake." Between myeighth and eleventh years I drew endlessly--battle pictures, sieges,bombardments, naval engagements. Then I filled a whole exercisebook with ink blots and amused myself giving them fantasticinterpretations. One of my reasons for liking school was that there Ifound at last the playmates I had lacked for so long.At school, I also discovered something else. But before I go into thisI should first mention that the nocturnal atmosphere had begun tothicken. All sorts of things were happening at night, thingsincomprehensible and alarming. My parents were sleeping apart. Islept in my father's room. From the door to my mother's room camefrightening influences. At night Mother was strange and mysterious.One night I saw coming from her door a faintly luminous, indefinitefigure whose head detached itself from the neck and floated alongin front of it, in the air, like a little moon. Immediately another headwas produced and again detached itself. This process wasrepeated six or seven times. I had anxiety dreams of things thatwere now small, now large. For instance, I saw a tiny ball at a greatdistance; gradually it approached, growing steadily into amonstrous and suffocating object. Or I saw telegraph wires withbirds sitting on them, and the wires grew thicker and thicker and myfear greater until the terror awoke me.

Although these dreams were overtures to the physiological changesof puberty, they had in their turn a prelude which occurred about myseventh year. At that time I was sick with pseudo-croup,accompanied by choking fits. One night during an attack I stood atthe foot of the bed, my head bent back over the bed rail, while myfather held me under the arms. Above me I saw a glowing bluecircle about the size of the full moon, and inside it moved goldenfigures which I thought were angels. This vision was repeated, andeach time it allayed my fear of suffocation. But the suffocationreturned in the anxiety dreams. I see in this a psychogenic factor:the atmosphere of the house was beginning to be unbreathable.I hated going to church. The one exception was Christmas Day. TheChristmas carol "This Is the Day That God Has Made" pleased meenormously. And then in the evening, of course, came theChristmas tree. Christmas was the only Christian festival I couldcelebrate with fervor. All others left me cold. New Y ear's Eve alonehad something of the attractiveness of Christmas, but definitely tooksecond place; Advent had a quality about it that somehow did not fitin with the coming Christmas. It had to do with night, storms, andwind, and also with the darkness of the house. There wassomething whispering, something queer going on.I return now to the discovery I made in the course of associatingwith my rustic schoolmates. I found that they alienated me frommyself. When I was with them I became different from the way I wasat home. I joined in their pranks, or invented ones which at homewould never have occurred to me, so it seemed; although, as I knewonly too well, I could hatch up all sorts of things when I was alone. Itseemed to me that the change in myself was due to the influence ofmy schoolfellows, who somehow misled me or compelled me to bedifferent from what I thought I was. The influence of this wider world,this world which contained others besides my parents, seemed tome dubious if not altogether suspect and, in some obscure way,

hostile. Though I became increasingly aware of the beauty of thebright daylight world where "golden sunlight filters through greenleaves," at the same time I had a premonition of an inescapableworld of shadows filled with frightening, unanswerable questionswhich had me at their mercy. My nightly prayer did, of course, grantme a ritual protection since it concluded the day properly and justas properly ushered in night and sleep. But the new peril lurked byday. It was as if I sensed a splitting of myself, and feared it. My innersecurity was threatened.I also recall from this period (seven to nine) that I was fond ofplaying with fire. In our garden there was an old wall built of largeblocks of stone, the interstices of which made interesting caves. Iused to tend a little fire in one of these caves, with other childrenhelping me; a fire that had to bum forever and therefore had to beconstantly maintained by our united efforts, which consisted ingathering the necessary wood. No one but myself was allowed totend this fire. Others could light other fires in other caves, but thesefires were profane and did not concern me. My fire alone was livingand had an unmistakable aura of sanctity.In front of this wall was a slope in which was embedded a stone thatjutted out--my stone. Often, when I was alone, I sat down on thisstone, and then began an imaginary game that went something likethis: "I am sitting on top of this stone and it is underneath." But thestone also could say "I" and think:"I am lying here on this slope and he is sitting on top of me." Thequestion then arose: "'Am I the one who is sitting on the stone, oram I the stone on which he is sitting?" This question alwaysperplexed me, and I would stand up, wondering who was what now.The answer remained totally unclear, and my uncertainty wasaccompanied by a feeling of curious and fascinating darkness. Butthere was no doubt whatsoever that this stone stood in some secret

relationship to me. I could sit on it for hours, fascinated by the puzzleit set me.Thirty years later I again stood on that slope. I was a married man,had children, a house, a place in the world, and a head full of ideasand plans, and suddenly I was again the child who had kindled a firefull of secret significance and sat down on a stone without knowingwhether it was I or I was it. I thought suddenly of my life in Zurich,and it seemed alien to me, like news from some remote world andtime. This was frightening, for the world of my childhood in which Ihad just become absorbed was eternal, and I had been wrenchedaway from it and had fallen into a time that continued to roll onward,moving farther and farther away. The pull of that other world was sostrong that I had to tear myself violently from the spot in order not tolose hold of my future.I have never forgotten that moment, for it illuminated in a flash oflightning the quality of eternity in my childhood. What this meant wasrevealed soon afterward, in my tenth year. My disunion with myselfand uncertainty in the world at large led me to an action which at thetime was quite incomprehensible to me. I had in those days ayellow, varnished pencil case of the kind commonly used byprimary-school pupils, with a little lock and the customary ruler. Atthe end of this ruler I now carved a little manikin, about two incheslong, with frock coat, top hat, and shiny black boots. I colored himblack with ink, sawed him off the ruler, and put him in the pencilcase, where I made him a little bed. I even made a coat for him outof a bit of wool. In the case I also placed a smooth, oblong blackishstone from the Rhine, which I had painted with water colors to lookas though it were divided into an upper and lower half, and had longcarried around in my trouser pocket. This was his stone. All this wasa great secret. Secretly I took the case to the forbidden attic at thetop of the house (forbidden because the floorboards were worm-eaten and rotten) and hid it with great satisfaction on one of the

beams under the roof--for no one must ever see it! I knew that not asoul would ever find it there. No one could discover my secret anddestroy it. I felt safe, and the tormenting sense of being at odds withmyself was gone. In all diflicult situations, whenever I had donesomething wrong or my feelings had been hurt, or when my father'sirritability or my mother's invalidism oppressed me, I thought of mycarefully bedded-down and wrapped-up manikin and his smooth,prettily colored stone. From time to time--often at intervals ofweeks--I secretly stole up to the attic when I could be certain that noone would see me. Then I clambered up on the beam, opened thecase, and looked at my manikin and his stone. Each time I did this Iplaced in the case a little scroll of paper on which I had previouslywritten something during school hours in a secret language of myown invention. The addition of a new scroll always had the characterof a solemn ceremonial act. Unfortunately I cannot remember what Iwanted to communicate to the manikin. I only know that my "letters"constituted a kind of library for him. I fancy, though I cannot becertain, that they may have consisted of sayings that particularlypleased me.The meaning of these actions, or how I might explain them, neverworried me. I contented myself with the feeling of newly wonsecurity, and was satisfied to possess something that no one knewand no one could get at. It was an inviolable secret which mustnever be betrayed, for the safety of my life depended on it. Why thatwas so I did not ask myself. It simply was so.This possession of a secret had a very powerful formative influenceon my character; I consider it the essential factor of my boyhood.Similarly , I never told anyone about the dream of the phallus; andthe Jesuit, too, belonged to that mysterious realm which I knew Imust not talk about. The little wooden figure with the stone was afirst attempt, still unconscious and childish, to give shape to thesecret. I was always absorbed by it and had the feeling I ought to

fathom it; and yet I did not know what it was I was trying to express. Ialways hoped I might be able to find something--perhaps in nature--that would give me the clue and show me where or what the secretwas. At that time my interest in plants, animals, and stones grew. Iwas constantly on the lookout for something mysterious.Consciously , I was religious in the Christian sense, though alwayswith the reservation: "But it is not so certain as all that!" or, "Whatabout that thing under the ground?" And when religious teachingswere pumped into me and I was told, "This is beautiful and this isgood," I would think to myself: "Y es, but there is something else,something very secret that people don't know about."The episode with the carved manikin formed the climax and theconclusion of my childhood. It lasted about a year. Thereafter Icompletely forgot the whole affair until I was thirty-five. Then thisfragment of memory rose up again from the mists of childhood withpristine clarity. While I was engaged on the preliminary studies formy book Wandlungen und Symbole der Libido. I read about thecache of soul--stones near Arlesheim, and the Australian churingas.I suddenly discovered that I had a quite definite image of such astone, though I had never seen any reproductions. It was oblong,blackish, and painted into an upper and lower half. This image wasjoined by that of the* Translated as Psychology of the Unconscebus, 1917; revised edition,retitled Symbols of Transformation (CW 5), 1956.pencil box and the manikin. The manikin was a little cloaked god ofthe ancient world, a T elesphoros such as stands on the monumentsof Asklepios and reads to him from a scroll. Along with thisrecollection there came to me, for the first time, the conviction thatthere are archaic psychic components which have entered theindividual psyche without any direct line of tradition. My father'slibrary--which I examined only very much later--contained not a

single book which might have transmitted any such information.Moreover, my father demonstrably knew nothing about these things.When I was in England in 1920, I carved out of wood two similarfigures without having the slightest recollection of that childhoodexperience. One of them I had reproduced on a larger scale instone, and this figure now stands in my garden in Kusnacht. Onlywhile I was doing this work did the unconscious supply me with aname. It called the figure Atmavictu--the "breath of life." It was afurther development of that fearful tree of my childhood dream,which was now revealed as the "breath of life," the creative impulse.Ultimately, the manikin was a kabir, wrapped in his little cloak,hidden in the kista, and provided with a supply of life-force, theoblong black stone. But these are connections which became clearto me only much later in life. When I was a child I performed theritual just as I have seen it done by the natives of Africa; they act firstand do not know what they are doing. Only long afterward do theyreflect on what they have done.

II

School YearsMY ELEVENTH Y ear was significant for me in another way, as Iwas then sent to the Gymnasium in Basel. Thus I was taken awayfrom my rustic playmates, and truly entered the "great world," wherepowerful personages, far more powerful than my father, lived in big,splendid houses, drove about in expensive carriages drawn bymagnificent horses, and talked a refined German and French. Theirsons, well dressed, equipped with fine manners and plenty ofpocket money, were now my classmates. With great astonishmentand a horrible secret envy I heard them tell about their vacations inthe Alps. They had been among those glowing snowy peaks nearZurich, had even been to the sea--this last absolutely flabbergastedme. I gazed upon them as if they were beings from another world,from that unattainable glory of flaming, snow-covered mountainsand from the remote, unimaginable sea. Then, for the first time, Ibecame aware how poor we were, that my father was a poorcountry parson and I a still poorer parson's son who had holes in hisshoes and had to sit for six hours in school with wet socks. I beganto see my parents with different eyes, and to understand their caresand worries. For my father in particular I felt compassionless,curiously enough, for my mother. She always seemed to me thestronger of the two.Nevertheless I always felt on her side when my father gave vent tohis moody irritability. This necessity for taking sides was not exactlyfavorable to the formation of my character. In order to liberatemyself from these conflicts I fell into the role of the superiorarbitrator who willy-nilly had to judge his parents. That caused acertain inflatedness in me; my unstable self-assurance was

increased and diminished at the same time.When I was nine years old my mother had had a little girl. My fatherwas excited and pleased. "Tonight you've been given a little sister,"he said to me, and I was utterly surprised, for I hadn't noticedanything. I had thought nothing of my mother's lying in bed morefrequently than usual, for I considered her taking to her bed aninexcusable weakness in any case. My father brought me to mymother's bedside, and she held out a little creature that lookeddreadfully disappointing: a red, shrunken face like an old man's, theeyes closed, and probably as blind as a young puppy, I thought. Onits back the thing had a few single long red hairs which were shownto me--had it been intended for a monkey? I was shocked and didnot know what to feel. Was this how newborn babies looked? Theymumbled something about the stork which was supposed to havebrought the baby. But then what about a litter of puppies or kittens?How many times would the stork have to fly back and forth beforethe litter was complete? And what about cows? I could not imaginehow the stork could manage to carry a whole calf in its bill. Besides,the farmers said the cow calved, not that the stork brought the calf.This story was obviously another of those humbugs which werealways being imposed on me. I felt sure that my mother had onceagain done something I was supposed not to know about.This sudden appearance of my sister left me with a vague sense ofdistrust which sharpened my curiosity and observation. Subsequentodd reactions on the part of my mother confirmed my suspicionsthat something regrettable was connected with this birth. Otherwisethis event did not bother me very much, though it probablycontributed to intensifying an experience I had when I was twelve.My mother had the unpleasant habit of calling after me all sorts ofgood advice when I was setting out for some place to which I hadbeen invited. On these occasions I not only wore my best clothes

and polished shoes, but felt the dignity of my purpose and of myappearance in public, so that it was a humiliation for me to havepeople on the street hear all the ignominious things my mothercalled out after me, "And don't forget to give them regards fromPapa and Mama, and wipe your nose--do you have ahandkerchief? Have you washed your hands?" And so on. It struckme as definitely unfair that the inferiority feelings whichaccompanied my self-importance should thus be exposed to theworld when I had taken every care, out of amour-propre and vanity,to present as irreproachable an appearance as possible. For theseoccasions meant a very great deal to me. On the way to the houseto which I was invited I felt important and dignified, as I always didwhen I wore my Sunday clothes on a weekday. The picture changedradically, however, as soon as I came in sight of the house I wasvisiting. Then a sense of the grandeur and power of those peopleovercame me. I was afraid of them, and in my smallness wished Imight sink fathoms deep into the ground. That was how I felt when Irang the bell. The tinkling sound from inside rang like the toll ofdoom in my ears. I felt as timid and craven as a stray dog. It wasever so much worse when my mother had prepared me properlybeforehand. Then the bell would ring in my ears: "My shoes arefilthy, and so are my hands; I have no handkerchief and my neck isblack with dirt." Out of defiance I would then not convey my parents'regards, or I would act with unnecessary shyness andstubbornness. If things became too bad I would think of my secrettreasure in the attic, and that helped me regain my poise. For in myforlorn state I remembered that I was also the "Other," the personwho possessed that inviolable secret, the black stone and the littleman in frock coat and top hat.I cannot recall in my boyhood ever having thought of the possibilityof a connection between Lord Jesus--or the Jesuit in the blackrobe--the men in frock coats and top hats standing by the grave, the

gravelike hole in the meadow, the underground temple of thephallus, and my little man in the pencil case. The dream of theithyphallic god was my first great secret; the manikin was thesecond. It does seem to me, however, that I had a vague sense ofrelationship between the "soulstone" and the stone which was alsomyself.To  t hi s  d a y,  wr i t i ng  d o wn m y m e m o r i e s  a t  t he  a g e  o f  e i g ht y- t hr e e ,  Ihave never fully unwound the tangle of my earliest memories. Theyare like individual shoots of a single underground rhizome, likestations on a road of unconscious development. While it becameincreasingly impossible for me to adopt a positive attitude to LordJesus, I remember that from the time I was eleven the idea of Godbegan to interest me. I took to praying to God, and this somehowsatisfied me because it was a prayer without contradictions. Godwas not complicated by my distrust. Moreover, he was not a personin a black robe, and not Lord Jesus of the pictures, draped withbrightly colored clothes, with whom people behaved so familiarly.Rather he was a unique being of whom, so I heard, it wasimpossible to form any correct conception. He was, to be sure,something like a very powerful old man. But to my great satisfactionthere was a commandment to the effect that "Thou shalt not makeunto thee any graven image or any likeness of anything." Thereforeone could not deal with him as familiarly as with Lord Jesus, whowas no "secret." A certain analogy with my secret in the attic beganto dawn on me.School came to bore me. It took up far too much time which I wouldrather have spent drawing battles and playing with fire. Divinityclasses were unspeakably dull, and I felt a downright fear of themathematics class. The teacher pretended that algebra was aperfectly natural affair, to be taken for granted, whereas I didn't evenknow what numbers really were. They were not flowers, not animals,not fossils; they were nothing that could be imagined, mere

quantities that resulted from counting. T o my confusion thesequantities were now represented by letters, which signified sounds,so that it became possible to hear them, so to speak. Oddlyenough, my classmates could handle these things and found themself-evident. No one could tell me what numbers were, and I wasunable even to formulate the question. To my horror I found that noone understood my difficulty. The teacher, I must admit, went togreat lengths to explain to me the purpose of this curious operationof translating understandable quantities into sounds. I finallygrasped that what was aimed at was a kind of system ofabbreviation, with the help of which many quantities could be put ina short formula. But this did not interest me in the least. I thought thewhole business was entirely arbitrary. Why should numbers beexpressed by sounds? One might just as well express a by appletree, b by box, and x by a question mark. a, b, c, x, y, z: were notconcrete and did not explain to me anything about the essence ofnumbers, any more than an apple tree did. But the thing thatexasperated me most of all was the proposition: If a = b and b = c,then a = c, even though by definition a meant something other thanb, and, being different, could therefore not be equated with b, letalone with c.Whenever it was a question of an equivalence, then it was said thata : a, b : b, and so on. This I could accept, whereas a : b seemed tome a downright lie or a fraud. I was equally outraged when theteacher stated in the teeth of his own definition of parallel lines thatthey met at infinity. This seemed to me no better than a stupid trickto catch peasants with, and I could not and would not have anythingto do with it. My intellectual morality fought against these whimsicalinconsistencies, which have forever debarred me fromunderstanding mathematics. Right into old age I have had theincorrigible feeling that if, like my schoolmates, I could haveaccepted without a struggle the proposition that a : b, or that sun :

moon, dog = cat, then mathematics might have fooled meendlessly--just how much I only began to realize at the age of eighty-four. All my life it remained a puzzle to me why it was that I nevermanaged to get my bearings in mathematics when there was nodoubt whatever that I could calculate properly. Least of all did Iunderstand my own moral doubts concerning mathematics.Equations I could comprehend only by inserting specific numericalvalues in place of the letters and verifying the meaning of theoperation by actual calculation. As we went on in mathematics I wasable to get along, more or less, by copying out algebraic formulaswhose meaning I did not understand, and by memorizing where aparticular combination of letters had stood on the blackboard. Icould no longer make headway by substituting numbers, for fromtime to time the teacher would say, "Here we put the expression so-and-so," and then he would scribble a few letters on the blackboard.I had no idea where he got them and why he did it--the only reason Icould see was that it enabled him to bring the procedure to what hefelt was a satisfactory conclusion. I was so intimidated by myincomprehension that I did not dare to ask any questions.Mathematics classes became sheer terror and torture to me. Othersubjects I found easy; and as, thanks to my good visual memory, Icontrived for a long while to swindle my way through mathematics, Iusually had good marks. But my fear of failure and my sense ofsmallness in face of the vast world around me created in me notonly a dislike but a kind of silent despair which completely ruinedschool for me. In addition, I was exempted from drawing classes ongrounds of utter incapacity. This in a way was welcome to me, sinceit gave me more free time; but on the other hand it was a freshdefeat, since I had some facility in drawing, although I did notrealize that it depended essentially on the way I was feeling. I coulddraw only what stirred my imagination. But I was forced to copyprints of Greek gods with sightless eyes, and when that wouldn't go

properly the teacher obviously thought I needed something morenaturalistic and set before me the picture of a goat's head. Thisassignment I failed completely, and that was the end of my drawingclasses.To  m y d e f e a t s  i n m a t he m a t i c s  a nd  d r a wi ng  t he r e  wa s  no w a d d e d  athird: from the very first I hated gymnastics. I could not endurehaving others tell me how to move. I was going to school in order tolearn something, not to practice useless and senseless acrobatics.Moreover, as a result of my earlier accidents, I had a certainphysical timidity which I was not able to overcome until much lateron. This timidity was in turn linked with a distrust of the world and itspotentialities. T o be sure, the world seemed to me beautiful anddesirable, but it was also filled with vague and incomprehensibleperils. Therefore I always wanted to know at the start to what and towhom I was entrusting myself. Was this perhaps connected with mymother, who had abandoned me for several months? When, as Ishall describe later, my neurotic fainting spells began, the doctorforbade me to engage in gymnastics, much to my satisfaction. I wasrid of that burden--and had swallowed another defeat.The time thus gained was not spent solely on play. It permitted meto indulge somewhat more freely the absolute craving I haddeveloped to read every scrap of printed matter that fell into myhands.My twelfth year was indeed a fateful one for me. One day in theearly summer of 1887 I was standing in the cathedral square,waiting for a classmate who went home by the same route asmyself. It was twelve o'clock, and the morning classes were over.Suddenly another boy gave me a shove that knocked me off myfeet. I fell, striking my head against the curbstone so hard that Ialmost lost consciousness. For about half an hour afterward I was alittle dazed. At the moment I felt the blow the thought flashed through

my mind: "Now you won't have to go to school any more." I was onlyhalf unconscious, but I remained lying there a few moments longerthan was strictly necessary, chiefly in order to avenge myself on myassailant. Then people picked me up and took me to a housenearby, where two elderly spinster aunts lived.From then on I began to have fainting spells whenever I had toreturn to school, and whenever my parents set me to doing myhomework. For more than six months I stayed away from school,and for me that was a picnic. I was free, could dream for hours, beanywhere I liked, in the woods or by the water, or draw. I resumedmy battle pictures and furious scenes of war, of old castles thatwere being assaulted or burned, or drew page upon page ofcaricatures. Similar caricatures sometimes appear to me beforefalling asleep to this day, grinning masks that constantly move andchange, among them familiar faces of people who soon afterwarddied.Above all, I was able to plunge into the world of the mysterious. T othat realm belonged trees, a pool, the swamp, stones and animals,and my father's library. But I was growing more and more away fromthe world, and had all the while faint pangs of conscience. I fritteredaway my time with loafing, collecting, reading, and playing. But I didnot feel any happier for it; I had the obscure feeling that I was fleeingfrom myself.I forgot completely how all this had come about, but I pitied myparents' worries. They consulted various doctors, who scratchedtheir heads and packed me off to spend the holidays with relativesin Winterthur. This city had a railroad station that proved a source ofendless delight to me. But when I returned home everything was asbefore. One doctor thought I had epilepsy. I knew what epileptic fitswere like and I inwardly laughed at such nonsense. My parentsbecame more worried than ever. Then one day a friend called on

my father. They were sitting in the garden and I hid behind a shrub,for I was possessed of an insatiable curiosity. I heard the visitorsaying to my father, "And how is your son?" "Ah, that's a sadbusiness," my father replied. "The doctors no longer know what iswrong with him. They think it may be epilepsy. It would be dreadful ifhe were incurable. I have lost what little I had, and what will becomeof the boy if he cannot earn his own living?"I was thunderstruck. This was the collision with reality."Why, then, I must get to work!" I thought suddenly.From that moment on I became a serious child. I crept away, wentto my father's study, took out my Latin grammar, and began to cramwith intense concentration. After ten minutes of this I had the finestof fainting fits. I almost fell off the chair, but after a few minutes I feltbetter and went on working."Devil take it, I'm not going to faint," I told myself, and persisted inmy purpose. This time it took about fifteen minutes before thesecond attack came. That, too, passed like the first. "And now youmust really get to workl" I stuck it out, and after an hour came thethird attack. Still I did not give up, and worked for another hour, until Ihad the feeling that I had overcome the attacks. Suddenly I feltbetter than I had in all the months before. And in fact the attacks didnot recur. From that day on I worked over my grammar and otherschoolbooks every day. A few weeks later I returned to school, andnever suffered another attack, even there. The whole bag of trickswas over and done with! That was when I learned what a neurosisis.Gradually the recollection of how it had all come about returned tome, and I saw clearly that I myself had arranged this wholedisgraceful situation. That was why I had never been seriously angry

with the schoolmate who pushed me over. I knew that he had beenput up to it, so to speak, and that the whole affair was a diabolicalplot on my part. I knew, too, that this was never going to happen tome again. I had a feeling of rage against myself, and at the sametime was ashamed of myself. For I knew that I had wronged myselfand made a fool of myself in my own eyes. Nobody else was toblame; I was the cursed renegade! From then on I could no longerendure my parents' worrying about me or speaking of me in apitying tone.The neurosis became another of my secrets, but it was a shamefulsecret, a defeat. Nevertheless it induced in me a studiedpunctiliousness and an unusual diligence. Those days saw thebeginnings of my conscientiousness, practiced not for the sake ofappearances, so that I would amount to something, but for my ownsake. Regularly I would get up at five o'clock in order to study, andsometimes I worked from three in the morning till seven, beforegoing to school.What had led me astray during the crisis, was my passion for beingalone, my delight in solitude. Nature seemed to me full of wonders,and I wanted to steep myself in them. Every stone, every plant,every single thing seemed alive and indescribably marvelous. Iimmersed myself in nature, crawled, as it were, into the veryessence of nature and away from the whole human world.I had another important experience at about this time. I was takingthe long road to school from Klein-Huningen, where we lived, toBasel, when suddenly for a single moment I had the overwhelmingimpression of having just emerged from a dense cloud. I knew all atonce: now I am myself! It was as if a wall of mist were at my back,and behind that wall there was not yet an "I". But at this moment Icame upon myself. Previously I had existed, too, but everything hadmerely happened to me.

Now I happened to myself. Now I knew: I am myself now, now I exist.Previously I had been willed to do this and that; now I willed. Thisexperience seemed to me tremendously important and new: therewas "authority" in me. Curiously enough, at this time and also duringthe months of my fainting neurosis I had lost all memory of thetreasure in the attic. Otherwise I would probably have realized eventhen the analogy between my feeling of authority and the feeling ofvalue which the treasure inspired in me. But that was not so; allmemory of the pencil case had vanished.Around this time I was invited to spend the holidays with friends ofthe family who had a house on Lake Lucerne. T o my delight thehouse was situated right on the lake, and there was a boathouseand a rowboat. My host allowed his son and me to use the boat,although we were sternly warned not to be reckless. Unfortunately Ialso knew how to steer a Waidling (a boat of the gondola type)--thatis to say , standing. At home we had such a punt, in which we hadtried out every imaginable trick. The first thing I did, therefore, wasto take my stand on the stern set and with one oar push off into thelake. That was too much for the anxious master of the house. Hewhistled us back and gave me a first-class dressing-down. I wasthoroughly crest-fallen but had to admit that I had done exactly whathe had said not to, and that his lecture was quite justified. At thesame time I was seized with rage that this fat, ignorant boor shoulddare to insult ME. This ME was not only grown up, but important, anauthority, a person with office and dignity, an old man, an object ofrespect and awe. Y et the contrast with reality was so grotesque thatin the midst of my fury I suddenly stopped myself, for the questionrose to my lips: '"Who in the world are you, anyway?Yo u a r e  r e a c t i ng  a s  t ho ug h yo u we r e  t he  d e vi l o nly k no ws  ho wimportant! And yet you know he is perfectly right. Y ou are barelytwelve years old, a schoolboy, and he is a father and a rich,

powerful man besides, who owns two houses and several splendidhorses."Then, to my intense confusion, it occurred to me that I was actuallytwo different persons. One of them was the schoolboy who couldnot grasp algebra and was far from sure of himself; the other wasimportant, a high authority , a man not to be trifled with, as powerfuland influential as this manufacturer. This "other" was an old manwho lived in the eighteenth century, wore buckled shoes and a whitewig and went driving in a fly with high, concave rear wheels betweenwhich the box was suspended on springs and leather straps.This notion sprang from a curious experience I had had. When wewere living in Klein-Huningen an ancient green carriage from theBlack Forest drove past our house one day . It was truly an antique,looking exactly as if it had come straight out of the eighteenthcentury. When I saw it, I felt with great excitement: "That's it! Sureenough, that comes from my times." It was as though I hadrecognized it because it was the same type as the one I had drivenin myself. Then came a curious sentiment écoeurant, as thoughsomeone had stolen something from me, or as though I had beencheated--cheated out of my beloved past. The carriage was a relicof those times! I cannot describe what was happening in me orwhat it was that affected me so strongly: a longing, a nostalgia, or arecognition that kept saying, "Y es, that's how it was! Y es, that's howit was!"I had still another experience that harked back to the eighteenthcentury. At the home of one of my aunts I had seen an eighteenth-century statuette, an old terra-cotta piece consisting of two paintedfigures. One of them was old Dr. Stuckelberger, a well-knownpersonality in the city of Basel toward the end of the eighteenthcentury. The other figure was a patient of his; she was depicted withclosed eyes, sticking out her tongue. The story went that old

Stuckelberger was one day crossing the Rhine bridge when thisannoying patient suddenly came up to him out of nowhere andbabbled out a complaint. Old Stuckelberger said testily, "Y es, yes,there must be something wrong with you. Put out your tongue andshut your eyes." The woman did so, and Stuckelberger instantly ranoff, and she remained standing there with her tongue stuck out,while the people laughed. This statuette of the old doctor hadbuckled shoes which in a strange way I recognized as my own. Iwas convinced that these were shoes I had worn. The convictiondrove me wild with excitement. "Why, those must be my shoes!" Icould still feel those shoes on my feet, and yet I could not explainwhere this crazy feeling came from. I could not understand thisidentity I felt with the eighteenth century . Often in those days I wouldwrite the date 1786 instead of 1886, and each time this happened Iwas overcome by an inexplicable nostalgia.After my escapade with the boat, and my well-merited punishment, Ibegan pondering these isolated impressions, and they coalescedinto a coherent picture: of myself living in two ages simultaneously ,and being two different persons. I felt confused, and was full to thebrim with heavy reflections. At last I reached the disappointingrealization that now, at any rate, I was nothing but the little schoolboywho had deserved his punishment, and who had to behaveaccording to his age. The other person must be sheer nonsense. Isuspected that he was somehow connected with the many tales Ihad heard from my parents and relatives about my grandfather. Yetthat was not quite right either, for he had been born in 1795 and hadtherefore lived in the nineteenth century; moreover he had died longbefore I was born. It could not be that I was identical with him. At thetime these considerations were, I should say, mostly in the form ofvague glimmerings and dreams. I can no longer remember whetherat that time I knew anything about my legendary kinship withGoethe. I think not, however, for I know that I first heard this tale from

strangers. I should add that there is an annoying tradition that mygrandfather was a natural son of Goethe.[1]1 In regard to the legend, twice alluded to in this book, that Jung was adescendant of Goethe, he related: "The wife of my great-grandfather (FranzIgnaz Jung, d. 1831), Sophie Ziegler, and her sister were associated withthe Mannheim Theater and were friends of many writers. The story goes thatSophie Ziegler had an illegitimate child by Goethe, and that this child wasmy grandfather, Carl Gustav Jung. This was considered virtually anestablished fact. My grandfather says not a word about it in his diaries,however. He mentions only that he once saw Goethe in Weimar, and thenmerely from behind! Sophie Ziegler Jung was later friendly with LotteKestner, a niece of Goethe's "Lottchen." This Lotte frequently came to seemy grandfather--as, incidentally, did Franz Liszt. In later years Lotte Kestnersettled in Basel, no doubt because of these close ties with the Jung family."No proof of this item of family tradition has been found in theavailable sources, the archives of the Goethehaus in Frankfurt amMain and the baptismal register in the Jesuitenkirche in Mannheim.Goethe was not in Mannheim at the period in question, and there isno record of Sophie Ziegler's staying in Weimar or anywhere inGoethe's vicinity.Jung used to speak of this stubbornly persistent legend with acertain gratified amusement, for it might serve to explain one subtleaspect of his fascination with Goethe's Faust; it belonged to aninner reality , as it were. On the other hand he would also call thestory "annoying." He thought it "in bad taste" and maintained thatthe world was already full of "too many fools who tell such tales ofthe 'unknown father'. " Above all, he felt that the legitimate line ofdescent, in particular from the learned Catholic doctor and juristCarl Jung (d. 1645)--discussed at the end of Chapter VIII--wasequally significant.---A. J.One fine summer day that same year I came out of school at noonand went to the cathedral square. The sky was gloriously blue, the

day one of radiant sunshine. The roof of the cathedral glittered, thesun sparkling from the new, brightly glazed tiles. I was overwhelmedby the beauty of the sight, and thought:"The world is beautiful and the church is beautiful, and God made allthis and sits above it far away in the blue sky on a golden throneand..." Here came a great hole in my thoughts, and a chokingsensation. I felt numbed, and knew only: "Don't go on thinking now!Something terrible is coming, something I do not want to think,something I dare not even approach. Why not? Because I would becommitting the most frightful of sins. What is the most terrible sin?Murder? No, it can't be that. The most terrible sin is the sin againstthe Holy Ghost, which cannot be forgiven. Anyone who commits thatsin is damned to hell for all eternity. That would be very sad for myparents, if their only son, to whom they are so attached, should bedoomed to eternal damnation. I cannot do that to my parents. All Ineed do is not go on thinking."That was easier said than done. On my long walk home I tried tothink all sorts of other things, but I found my thoughts returning againand again to the beautiful cathedral which I loved so much, and toGod sitting on the throne--and then my thoughts would fly off againas if they had received a powerful electric shock. I kept repeating tomyself: "Don't think of it, just don't think of itI" I reached home in apretty worked-up state. My mother noticed that something waswrong, and asked, "What is the matter with you? Has somethinghappened at school?" I was able to assure her, without lying, thatnothing had happened at school. I did have the thought that it mighthelp me if I could confess to my mother the real reason for myturmoil. But to do so I would have to do the very thing that seemedimpossible: think my thought right to the end. The poor dear wasutterly unsuspecting and could not possibly know that I was interrible danger of committing the unforgivable sin and plungingmyself into hell. I rejected the idea of confessing and tried to efface

myself as much as possible. That night I slept badly; again andagain the forbidden thought, which I did not yet know, tried to breakout, and I struggled desperately to fend it off. The next two dayswere sheer torture, and my mother was convinced that I was ill. But Iresisted the temptation to confess, aided by the thought that itwould cause my parents intense sorrow.On the third night, however, the torment became so unbearable thatI no longer knew what to do. I awoke from a restless sleep just intime to catch myself thinking again about the cathedral and God. Ihad almost continued the thought! I felt my resistance weakening.Sweating with fear, I sat up in bed to shake off sleep. "Now it iscoming, now--it's serious! I must think. It must be thought outbeforehand. Why should I think something I do not know? I don'twant to, by God, that's sure. But who wants me to? Who wants toforce me to think something I don't know and don't want to know?Where does this terrible will come from? And why should I be theone to be subjected to it? I was thinking praises of the Creator ofthis beautiful world, I was grateful to him for this immeasurable gift,so why should I have to think something inconceivably wicked? Idon't know what it is, I really don't, for I cannot and must not comeanywhere near this thought, for that would be to risk thinking it atonce. I haven't done this or wanted this, it has come on me like abad dream. Where do such things come from? This has happenedto me without my doing. Why? After all, I didn't create myself, I cameinto the world the way God made me--that is, the way I was shapedby my parents. Or can it have been that my parents wantedsomething of this sort? But my good parents would never have hadany thoughts like that. Nothing so atrocious would ever haveoccurred to them."I found this idea utterly absurd. Then I thought of my grandparents,whom I knew only from their portraits. They looked benevolent and

dignified enough to repulse any idea that they might possibly be toblame. I mentally ran through the long procession of unknownancestors until finally I arrived at Adam and Eve. And with themcame the decisive thought: Adam and Eve were the first people;they had no parents, but were created directly by God, whointentionally made them as they were. They had no choice but to beexactly the way God had created them. Therefore they did not knowhow they could possibly be different. They were perfect creatures ofGod, for He creates only perfection, and yet they committed the firstsin by doing what God did not want them to do. How was thatpossible? They could not have done it if God had not placed inthem the possibility of doing it. That was clear, too, from theserpent, whom God had created before them, obviously so that itcould induce Adam and Eve to sin. God in His omniscience hadarranged everything so that the first parents would have to sin.Therefore it was God' s intention that they should sin. This thoughtliberated me instantly from my worst torment, since I now knew thatGod Himself had placed me in this situation. At first I did not knowwhether He intended me to commit my sin or not. I no longer thoughtof praying for illumination, since God had landed me in this fixwithout my willing it and had left me without any help. I was certainthat I must search out His intention myself, and seek the way outalone. At this point another argument began. "What does Godwant? To act or not to act? I must find out what God wants with me,and I must find out right away."I was aware, of course, that according to conventional morality therewas no question but that sin must be avoided. That was what I hadbeen doing up to now, but I knew I could not go on doing it. Mybroken sleep and my spiritual distress had worn me out to such apoint that fending off the thought was tying me into unbearableknots. This could not go on. At the same time, I could not yieldbefore I understood what God's will was and what He intended. For

I was now certain that He was the author of this desperate problem.Oddly enough, I did not think for a moment that the devil might beplaying a trick on me. The devil played little part in my mental worldat that time, and in any case I regarded him as powerlesscompared with God. But from the moment I emerged from the mistand became conscious of myself, the unity, the greatness, and thesuperhuman majesty of God began to haunt my imagination. Hencethere was no question in my mind but that God Himself wasarranging a decisive test for me, and that everything depended onmy understanding Him correctly. I knew, beyond a doubt, that Iwould ultimately be compelled to break down, to give way, but I didnot want it to happen without my understanding it, since thesalvation of my eternal soul was at stake."God knows that I cannot resist much longer, and He does not helpme, although I am on the point of having to commit the unforgivablesin. In His omnipotence He could easily lift this compulsion from me,but evidently He is not going to. Can it be that He wishes to test myobedience by imposing on me the unusual task of doing somethingagainst my own moral judgment and against the teachings of myreligion, and even against His own commandment, something I amresisting with all my strength because I fear eternal damnation? Is itpossible that God wishes to see whether I am capable of obeyingHis will even though my faith and my reason raise before me thespecters of death and hell? That might really be the answer! Butthese are merely my own thoughts. I may be mistaken. I dare nottrust my own reasoning as far as that. I must think it all through oncemore."I thought it over again and arrived at the same conclusion."Obviously God also desires me to show courage," I thought. "If thatis so and I go through with it, then He will give me His grace andillumination?

I gathered all my courage, as though I were about to leap forthwithinto hell-fire, and let the thought come. I saw before me thecathedral, the blue sky. God sits on His golden throne, high abovethe world--and from under the throne an enormous turd falls uponthe sparkling new roof, shatters it, and breaks the walls of thecathedral asunder.So that was it! I felt an enormous, an indescribable relief. Instead ofthe expected damnation, grace had come upon me, and with it anunutterable bliss such as I had never known. I wept for happinessand gratitude. The wisdom and goodness of God had beenrevealed to me now that I had yielded 'to His inexorable command.It was as though I had experienced an illumination. A great manythings I had not previously understood became clear to me. Thatwas what my father had not understood, I thought; he had failed toexperience the will of God, had opposed it for the best reasons andout of the deepest faith. And that was why he had neverexperienced the miracle of grace which heals all and makes allcomprehensible. He had taken the Bible's commandments as hisguide; he believed in God as the Bible prescribed and as hisforefathers had taught him. But he did not know the immediate livingGod who stands, omnipotent and free, above His Bible and HisChurch, who calls upon man to partake of His freedom, and canforce him to renounce his own views and convictions in order tofulfill without reserve the command of God. In His trial of humancourage God refuses to abide by traditions, no matter how sacred.In His omnipotence He will see to it that nothing really evil comes ofsuch tests of courage. If one fulfills the will of God one can be sureof going the right way.God had also created Adam and Eve in such a way that they had tothink what they did not at all want to think. He had done that in orderto find out whether they were obedient. And He could also demandsomething of me that I would have had to reject on traditional

religious grounds. It was obedience which brought me grace, andafter that experience I knew what God's grace was. One must beutterly abandoned to God; nothing matters but fulfilling His will.Otherwise all is folly and meaninglessness. From that moment on,when I experienced grace, my true responsibility began. Why didGod befoul His cathedral? That, for me, was a terrible thought. Butthen came the dim understanding that God could be somethingterrible. I had experienced a dark and terrible secret. Itovershadowed my whole life, and I became deeply pensive.The experience also had the effect of increasing my sense ofinferiority . I am a devil or a swine, I thought; I am infinitely depraved.But then I began searching through the New T estament and read,with a certain satisfaction, about the Pharisee and the publican, andthat reprobates are the chosen ones. It made a lasting impressionon me that the unjust steward was praised, and that Peter, thewaverer, was appointed the rock upon which the Church was built.The greater my inferiority feelings became, the moreincomprehensible did God's grace appear to me. After all, I hadnever been sure of myself. When my mother once said to me, "Youhave always been a good boy, I simply could not grasp it. I a goodboy? That was quite new to me. I often thought of myself as acorrupt and inferior person.With the experience of God and the cathedral I at last hadsomething tangible that was part of the great secret--as if I hadalways talked of stones falling from heaven and now had one in mypocket. But actually, it was a shaming experience. I had fallen intosomething bad, something evil and sinister, though at the sametime it was a kind of distinction. Sometimes I had an overwhelmingurge to speak, not about that, but only to hint that there were somecurious things about me which no one knew of. I wanted to find outwhether other people had undergone similar experiences. I never

succeeded in discovering so much as a trace of them in others. Asa result, I had the feeling that I was either outlawed or elect,accursed or blessed.It would never have occurred to me to speak of my experienceopenly, nor of my dream of the phallus in the underground temple,nor of my carved manikin. As a matter of fact, I did not say anythingabout the phallus dream until I was sixty-five. I may have spokenabout the other experiences to my wife, but only in later years. Astrict taboo hung over all these matters, inherited from mychildhood. I could never have talked about them with friends.My entire youth can be understood in terms of this secret. It inducedin me an almost unendurable loneliness. My one great achievementduring those years was that I resisted the temptation to talk about itwith anyone. Thus the pattern of my relationship to the world wasalready prefigured: today as then I am a solitary, because I knowthings and must hint at things which other people do not know, andusually do not; even want to know.In my mother's family there were six parsons, and on my father'sside not only was my father a parson but two of my uncles also.Thus I heard many religious conversations, theological discussions,and sermons. Whenever I listened to them I had the feeling: "Y es,yes, that is all very well. But what about the secret? The secret isalso the secret of grace. None of you know anything about that. Y oudon't know that God wants to, force me to do wrong, that He forcesme to think abominations in order to experience His grace."Everything the others said was completely beside the point. Ithought, "For Heaven's sake, there must be someone who knowssomething about it; somewhere there must be the truth." Irummaged through my father's library, reading whatever I could onGod, the Trinity, spirit, consciousness. I devoured the books, butcame away none the wiser. I always found myself thinking, "They

don't know either."I even searched about in my father's Luther Bible. Unfortunately, theconventional "edifying" interpretation of Job prevented me fromtaking a deeper interest in this book. I would have found consolationin it, especially in chapter 9, verses 30 ff.: "Though I wash myselfwith snow water... yet shalt thou plunge me in the mire."Later my mother told me that in those days I was often depressed. Itwas not really that; rather, I was brooding on the secret. At suchtimes it was strangely reassuring and calming to sit on my stone.Somehow it would free me of all my doubts. Whenever I thought thatI was the stone, the conflict ceased."The stone has no uncertainties, no urge to communicate, and iseternally the same for thousands of years," I would think, "while I amonly a passing phenomenon which bursts into all kinds of emotions,like a flame that flares up quickly and then goes out." I was but thesum of my emotions, and the other in me was the timeless,imperishable stone.At that time, too, there arose in me profound doubts abouteverything my father said. When I heard him preaching about grace,I always thought of my own experience. What he said sounded staleand hollow, like a tale told by someone who knows it only byhearsay and cannot quite believe it himself. I wanted to help him,but I did not know how. Moreover, I was too shy to tell him of myexperience, or to meddle in his personal preoccupations. I feltmyself to be on the one hand too little, and on the other hand I wasafraid to wield that authority which my "second personality" inspiredin me.Later, when I was eighteen years old, I had many discussions withmy father, always with the secret hope of being able to let him know

about the miracle of grace, and thereby help to mitigate his pangsof conscience. I was convinced that if he fulfilled the will of Godeverything would turn out for the best.But our discussions invariably came to an unsatisfactory end. Theyirritated him, and saddened him. "Oh nonsense," he was in thehabit of saying, "you always want to think. One ought not to think, butbelieve." I would think, "No, one must experience and know," but Iwould say, "Give me this belief," whereupon he would shrug andturn resignedly away.I began making friendships, mostly with shy boys of simple origins.My marks in school improved. During the following years I evensucceeded in reaching the top of the class. However, I observedthat below me were schoolmates who envied me and tried at everyopportunity to catch up with me. That spoiled my pleasure. I hatedall competition, and if someone played a game too competitively Iturned my back on the game. Thereafter I remained second in theclass, and found this considerably more enjoyable. Schoolwork wasa nuisance enough anyway without my wanting to make it harder bycompetitiveness. A very few teachers, whom I remember withgratitude, showed particular confidence in me. The one I recall withthe greatest pleasure was the Latin teacher. He was a universityprofessor and a very clever fellow. As it happened, I had knownLatin since I was six, because my father had given me lessons in it.So, instead of making me sit in class, this teacher would often sendme to the university library to fetch books for him, and I would joyfullydip into them while prolonging the walk back as much as possible.Most of the teachers thought me stupid and crafty. Wheneveranything went wrong in school I was the first on whom suspicionrested. If there was a row somewhere, I was thought to be theinstigator. In reality I was involved in such a brawl only once, and itwas then that I discovered that a number of my school-mates were

hostile to me. Seven of them lay in ambush for me and suddenlyattacked me. I was big and strong by then--it was when I wasfifteen--and inclined to violent rages. I suddenly saw red, seized oneof the boys by both arms, swung him around me and with his legsknocked several of the others to the ground. The teachers found outabout the affair, but I only dimly remember some sort of punishmentwhich seemed to me unjust. From then on I was let alone. No onedared to attack me again.To  ha ve  e ne m i e s  a nd  b e  a c c us e d  unj us t l y wa s  no t  wha t  I ha dexpected, but somehow I did not find it incomprehensible.Everything I was reproached for irritated me, but I could not denythese reproaches to myself. I knew so little about myself, and thelittle was so contradictory that I could not with a good consciencereject any accusations. As a matter of fact I always had a guiltyconscience and was aware of both actual and potential faults. Forthat reason I was particularly sensitive to reproofs, since all of themmore or less struck home. Although I had not in reality done what Iwas accused of, I felt that I might have done it. I would even draw upa list of alibis in case I should be accused of something. I feltpositively relieved when I had actually done something wrong. Thenat least I knew what my guilty conscience was for.Naturally I compensated my inner insecurity by an outward show ofsecurity, or--to put it better--the defect compensated itself withoutthe intervention of my will. That is, I found myself being guilty and atthe same time wishing to be innocent. Somewhere deep in thebackground I always knew that I was two persons. One was the sonof my parents, who went to school and was less intelligent, attentive,hard-working, decent, and clean than many other boys. The otherwas grown up--old, in fact--skeptical, mistrustful, remote from theworld of men, but close to nature, the earth, the sun, the moon, theweather, a living creatures, and above all close to the night, todreams, and to whatever "God" worked directly in him. I put "God"

in quotation marks here. For nature seemed, like myself, to havebeen set aside by God as non-divine, although created by Him asan expression of Himself. Nothing could persuade me that "in theimage of God" applied only to man. In fact it seemed to me that thehigh mountains, the rivers, lakes, trees, flowers, and animals farbetter exemplified the essence of God than men with theirridiculous clothes, their meanness, vanity, mendacity, and abhorrentegotism--all qualities with which I was only too familiar from myself,that is, from personality No. 1, the schoolboy of 1890. Besides hisworld there existed another realm, like a temple in which anyonewho entered was transformed and suddenly overpowered by avision of the whole cosmos, so that he could only marvel andadmire, forgetful of himself. Here lived the "Other," who knew Godas a hidden, personal, and at the same time suprapersonal secret.Here nothing separated man from God; indeed, it was as thoughthe human mind looked down upon Creation simultaneously withGod.What I am here unfolding, sentence by sentence, is something I wasthen not conscious of in any articulate way, though I sensed it withan overpowering premonition and intensity of feeling. At such timesI knew I was worthy of myself, that I was my true self. As soon as Iwas alone, I could pass over into this state. I therefore sought thepeace and solitude of this "Other," personality No. 2.The play and counterplay between personalities No. 1 and No. 2,which has run through my whole life, has nothing to do with a "split"or dissociation in the ordinary medical sense. On the contrary, it isplayed out in every individual. In my life No. 2 has been of primeimportance, and I have always tried to make room for anything thatwanted to come to me from within. He is a typical figure, but he isperceived only by the very few. Most people's consciousunderstanding is not sufficient to realize that he is also what they

are.Church gradually became a place of torment to me. For there mendared to preach aloud--I am tempted to say, shamelessly--aboutGod, about His intentions and actions. There people were exhortedto have those feelings and to believe that secret which I knew to bethe deepest, innermost certainty, a certainty not to be betrayed by asingle word. I could only conclude that apparently no one knewabout this secret, not even the parson, for otherwise no one wouldhave dared to expose the mystery of God in public and to profanethose inexpressible feelings with stale sentimentalities. Moreover, Iwas certain that this was the wrong way to reach God, for I knew,knew from experience, that this grace was accorded only to onewho fulfilled the will of God without reservation. This was preachedfrom the pulpit, too, but always on the assumption that revelationhad made the will of God plain. To me, on the other hand, it seemedthe most obscure and unknown thing of all. T o me it seemed thatone's duty was to explore daily the will of God. I did not do that, but Ifelt sure that I would do it as soon as an urgent reason for so doingpresented itself. Personality No. 1 preoccupied me too much of thetime. It often seemed to me that religious precepts were being putin place of the will of God--which could be so unexpected and soalarming--for the sole purpose of sparing people the necessity forunderstanding God's will. I grew more and more skeptical, and myfather's sermons and those of other parsons became acutelyembarrassing to me. All the people about me seemed to take thejargon for granted, and the dense obscurity that emanated from it;thoughtlessly they swallowed all the contradictions, such as thatGod is omniscient and therefore foresaw all human history, and thathe actually created human beings so that they would have to sin,and nevertheless forbids them to sin and even punishes them byeternal damnation in hell-fire.For a long time the devil had played no part in my thinking, curiously

enough. The devil appeared to me no worse than a powerful man'svicious watchdog, chained up. Nobody had any responsibility forthe world except God, and, as I knew only too well, He could beterrible. My doubts and uneasiness increased whenever I heard myfather in his emotional sermons speak of the "good" God, praisingGod's love for man and exhorting man to love God in return. "Doeshe really know what he is talking about?" I wondered. "Could hehave me, his son, put to the knife as a human sacrifice, like Isaac,or deliver him to an unjust court which would have him crucified likeJesus? No, he could not do that. Therefore in some cases he couldnot do the will of God, which can be absolutely terrible, as the Bibleitself shows." It became clear to me that when people are exhorted,among other things, to obey God rather than man, this is said justcasually and thoughtlessly. Obviously we do not know the will of Godat all, for if we did we would treat this central problem with awe, ifonly out of sheer fear of the overpowering God who can work Histerrifying will on helpless human beings, as He had done to me.Could anyone who pretended to know the will of God have foreseenwhat He had caused me to do? In the New Testament, at any rate,there was nothing comparable. The Old T estament, and especiallythe Book of Job, might have opened my eyes in this respect, but atthat time I was not familiar enough with it. Nor had I heard anythingof the sort in the instruction for confirmation, which I was thenreceiving. The fear of God, which was of course mentioned, wasconsidered antiquated, "Jewish," and long since superseded by theChristian message of God's love and goodness.The symbolism of my childhood experiences and the violence of theimagery upset me terribly. I asked myself: "Who talks like that? Whohas the impudence to exhibit a phallus so nakedly, and in a shrine?Who makes me think that God destroys His Church in thisabominable manner?" At last I asked myself whether it was not thedevil's doing. For that it must have been God or the devil who spoke

and acted in this way was something I never doubted. I feltabsolutely sure that it was not myself who had invented thesethoughts and images. These were the crucial experiences of mylife. It was then that it dawned on me: I must take the responsibility,it is up to me how my fate turns out. I had been confronted with aproblem to which I had to find the answer. And who posed theproblem?Nobody ever answered me that. I knew that I had to find the answerout of my deepest self, that I was alone before God, and that Godalone asked me these terrible things.From the beginning I had a sense of destiny, as though my life wasassigned to me by fate and had to be fulfilled. This gave me aninner security , and, though I could never prove it to myself, it proveditself to me. I did not have this certainty , it had me. Nobody couldrob me of the conviction that it was enjoined upon me to do whatGod wanted and not what I wanted. That gave me the strength to gomy own way. Often I had the feeling that in all decisive matters I wasno longer among men, but was alone with God. And when I was"there," where I was no longer alone, I was outside time; I belongedto the centuries; and He who then gave answer was He who hadalways been, who had been before my birth. He who always is wasthere. These talks with the "Other" were my profoundestexperiences: on the one hand a bloody struggle, on the othersupreme ecstasy.Naturally, I could not talk with anyone about these things. I knew ofno one to whom I might have communicated them except, possibly,my mother. She seemed to think along somewhat similar lines asmyself. But I soon noticed that in conversation she was notadequate for me. Her attitude toward me was above all one ofadmiration, and that was not good for me. And so I remained alonewith my thoughts. On the whole, I liked that best. I played alone,

daydreamed or strolled in the woods alone, and had a secret worldof my own.My mother was a very good mother to me. She had a hearty animalwarmth, cooked wonderfully, and was most companionable andpleasant. She was very stout, and a ready listener. She also liked totalk, and her chatter was like the gay plashing of a fountain. Shehad a decided literary gift, as well as taste and depth. But thisquality never properly emerged; it remained hidden beneath thesemblance of a kindly, fat old woman, extremely hospitable, andpossessor of a great sense of humor.She held all the conventional opinions a person was obliged tohave, but then her unconscious personality would suddenly put in anappearance. That personality was unexpectedly powerful: asomber, imposing figure possessed of unassailable authority andno bones about it. I was sure that she consisted of twopersonalities, one innocuous and human, the other uncanny.This other emerged only now and then, but each time it wasunexpected and frightening. She would then speak as if talking toherself, but what she said was aimed at me and usually struck to thecore of my being, so that I was stunned into silence. The first time Iremember this happening was when I was about six years old. Atthat time we had neighbors who were fairly well off. They had threechildren, the eldest a boy of about my own age, and two youngersisters. They were city folk who, especially on Sundays, dressedtheir children in a manner that seemed ridiculous to me--patent-leather shoes, white frills, little white gloves. Even on weekdays thechildren were scrubbed and combed. They had fancy manners andanxiously kept their distance from the tough, rude boy with tatteredtrousers, holes in his shoes, and dirty hands. My mother annoyedme no end with her comparisons and admonishments:

"Now look at those nice children, so well brought up and polite, butyou behave like a little lout." Such exhortations humiliated me, and Idecided to give the boy a hiding--which I did. His mother wasfurious, hastened to mine and made a great to-do over my act ofviolence. My mother was properly horrified and gave me a lecture,spiced with tears, longer and more passionate than anything I hadever heard from her before. I had not been conscious of any fault;on the contrary, I was feeling pretty pleased with myself, for itseemed to me that I had somehow made amends for theincongruous presence of this stranger in our village. Deeply awedby my mother's excitement, I withdrew penitently to my table behindour old spinet and began playing with my bricks. For some timethere was silence in the room. My mother had taken her usual seatby the window, and was knitting. Then I heard her muttering toherself, and from occasional words that I picked up I gathered thatshe was thinking about the incident, but was now taking anotherview of it.Suddenly she said aloud, "Of course one should never have kept alitter like that!" I realized at once that she was talking about those"dressed-up monkeys." Her favorite brother was a hunter who keptdogs and was always talking about dog breeding, mongrels,purebreds, and litters. T o my relief I realized that she too regardedthose odious children as inferior whelps, and that her scoldingtherefore need not he taken at face value.But I also knew, even at that age, that I must keep perfectly still andnot come out triumphantly with: "You see, you think as I dol" Shewould have repudiated the idea indignantly: "You horrid boy, howdare you pretend such a thing about your mother!" I conclude fromthis that I must already have had earlier experiences of a similarnature which I have forgotten.I tell this story because at the time of my growing religious

skepticism there was another instance which threw light on mymother's twofold nature. At table one day the talk turned on thedullness of the tunes of certain hymns. A possible revision of thehymnal was mentioned. At that my mother murmured, "O du Liebemeiner Liebe, dn oerwrlnschte " SeIigkeit" (O thou love of my love,thou accursed bliss). As in the past I pretended that I had not heardand was careful not to cry out in glee, in spite of my feeling oftriumph.There was an enormous difference between my mother's twopersonalities. That was why as a child I often had anxiety dreamsabout her. By day she was a loving mother, but at night she seemeduncanny. Then she was like one of those seers who is at the sametime a strange animal, like a priestess in a bear's cave. Archaicand ruthless; ruthless as truth and nature. At such moments she wasthe embodiment of what I have called the "natural mind."I too have this archaic nature, and in me it is linked with the gift--notalways pleasant--of seeing people and things as they are. I can letmyself be deceived from here to Tipperary when I don't want torecognize something, and yet at bottom I know quite well howmatters really stand. In this I am like a dog; he can be tricked, but healways smells it out in the end. This "insight" is based on instinct, oron a "perticipetion mystique" with others. It is as if the "eyes of thebackground" do the seeing in an impersonal act of perception.Slip of the tongue for erwunscht (longed for).'The "natural mind" is the "mind which says absolutely straight andruthless things." (Seminar on Interpretation of Visions [Zitrich,privately printed, 1940], V, p. iv.) "That is the sort of mind whichsprings from natural sources, and not from opinions taken frombooks; it wells up from the earth like a natural spring, and bringswith it the peculiar wisdom of nature" (Ibid., VI, p. 34.)

This was something I did not realize until much later, when somevery strange things happened to me. For instance, there was thetime when I recounted the life story of a man without knowing him. Itwas at the wedding of a friend of my wife's; the bride and her familywere all entirely unknown to me. During the meal I was sittingopposite a middle-aged gentleman with a long, handsome beard,who had been introduced to me as a barrister. We were having ananimated conversation about criminal psychology. In order toanswer a particular question of his, I made up a story to illustrate it,embellishing it with all sorts of details. While I was telling my story, Inoticed that a quite different expression came over the man's face,and a silence fell on the table. Very much abashed, I stoppedspeaking.Thank heavens we were already at the dessert, so I soon stood upand went into the lounge of the hotel. There I withdrew into a corner,lit a cigar, and tried to think over the situation. At this moment one ofthe other guests who had been sitting at my table came over andasked reproachfully, "How did you ever come to commit such afrightful indiscretion?" "Indiscretion?" "Why yes, that story you told.""But I made it all up!"To  m y a m a ze m e nt  a nd  ho r r o r  i t  t ur ne d  o ut  t ha t  I ha d  t o l d  t he  s t o r y o fthe man opposite me, exactly and in all its details. I alsodiscovered, at this moment, that I could no longer remember asingle word of the story--even to this day I have been unable torecall it. In his Selbstschau, Zschokke describes a similar incident:how once, in an inn, he was able to unmask an unknown young manas a thief, because he had seen the theft being committed beforehis inner eye.In the course of my life it has often happened to me that I suddenlyknew something which I really could not know at all. The knowledge

came to me as though it were my own idea. It was the same with mymother. She did not know what she was saying; it was like a voicewielding absolute authority, which said exactly what fitted thesituation.My mother usually assumed that I was mentally far beyond* Johann Heinrich Daniel Zschokke ( 1771-1848 ), Swiss author of historicalnovels and Studies in Swiss and Bavarian history. Cf. Civilization inTransition (CW 10, pm. 850).my age, and she would talk to me as to a grown-up. It was plain thatshe was telling me everything she could not say to my father, for sheearly made me her confidant and confided her troubles to me. Thus,I was about eleven years old when she informed me of a matter thatconcerned my father and alarmed me greatly. I racked my brains,and at last came to the conclusion that I must consult a certainfriend of my father's whom I knew by hearsay to be an influentialperson. Without saying a word to my mother, I went into town oneafternoon after school and called at this man's house. The maidwho opened the door told me that he was out. Depressed anddisappointed, I returned home. But it was by the mercy ofprovidence that he was not there. Soon afterward my mother againreferred to this matter, and this time gave me a very different andfar milder picture of the situation, so that the whole thing went up insmoke. That struck me to the quick, and I thought: "What an ass youwere to believe it, and you nearly caused a disaster with your stupidseriousness? From then on I decided to divide everything mymother said by two. My confidence in her was strictly limited, andthat was what prevented me from ever telling her about my deeperpreoccupations.But then came the moments when her second personality burstforth, and what she said on those occasions was so true and to the

point that I trembled before it. If my mother could then have beenpinned down, I would have had a wonderful lnterlocutor.With my father it was quite different. I would have liked to lay myreligious difficulties before him and ask him for advice, but I did notdo so because it seemed to me that I knew in advance what hewould be obliged to reply out of respect for his office. How right Iwas in this assumption was demonstrated to me soon afterward.My father personally gave me my instruction for confirmation. Itbored me to death. One day I was leafing through the catechism,hoping to find something besides the sentimental-sounding andusually incomprehensible as well as uninteresting expatiations onLord Jesus. I came across the paragraph on the Trinity. Here wassomething that challenged my interest: a oneness which wassimultaneously a threeness.This was a problem that fascinated me because of its innercontradiction. I waited longingly for the moment when we wouldreach this question. But when we got that far, my father said, "Wenow come to the Trinity, but we'll skip that, for I really understandnothing of it myself." I admired my father's honesty, but on the otherhand 'I was profoundly disappointed and said to myself, "There wehave it; they know nothing about it and don't give it a thought. Thenhow can I talk about my secret?"I made vain, tentative attempts with certain of my school-fellowswho struck me as reflective. I awakened no response, but, on thecontrary, a stupefaction that warned me off. In spite of the boredom,I made every effort to believe without understanding--an attitudewhich seemed to correspond with my father's--and prepared myselffor Communion, on which I had set my last hopes. This was, Ithought, merely a memorial meal, a kind of anniversary celebrationfor Lord Jesus who had died 1890-30 : 1860 years ago. But still, hehad let fall certain hints such as, "Take, eat, this is my body,"

meaning that we should eat the Communion bread as if it were hisbody, which after all had originally been flesh. Likewise we were todrink the wine which had originally been blood. It was clear to methat in this fashion we were to incorporate him into ourselves. Thisseemed to me so preposterous an impossibility that I was suresome great mystery must lie behind it, and that I would participate inthis mystery in the course of Communion, on which my fatherseemed to place so high a value. As was customary, a member ofthe church committee stood godfather to me. He was a nice,taciturn old man, a wheelwright in whose workshop I had oftenstood, watching his skill with lathe and adze. Now he came,solemnly transformed by frock coat and top hat, and took me tochurch, where my father in his familiar robes stood behind the altarand read prayers from the liturgy. On the white cloth covering thealtar lay large trays filled with small pieces of bread. I could see thatthe bread came from our baker, whose baked goods weregenerally poor and flat in taste. From a pewter jug, wine was pouredinto a pewter cup. My father ate a piece of the bread, took aswallow of the wine--I knew the tavern from which it had come--andpassed the cup to one of the old men. All were stiff, solemn, and itseemed to me, uninterested. I looked on in suspense, but could notsee or guess whether anything unusual was going on inside the oldmen. The atmosphere was the same as that of all otherperformances in church--baptisms, funerals, and so on. I had theimpression that something was being performed here, in thetraditionally correct manner. My father, too, seemed to be chieflyconcerned with going through it all according to rule, and it was partof this rule that the appropriate words were read or spoken withemphasis. There was no mention of the fact that it was now 1860years since Jesus had died, whereas in all other memorial servicesthe date was stressed. I saw no sadness and no joy, and felt thatthe feast was meager in every respect, considering theextraordinary importance of the person whose memory was being

celebrated. It did not compare at all with secular festivals.Suddenly my turn came. I ate the bread; it tasted flat, as I hadexpected. The wine, of which I took only the smallest sip, was thinand rather sour plainly not of the best. Then came the final prayer,and the people went out, neither depressed nor illumined with joy,but with faces that said, "So that's that." I walked home with myfather, intensely conscious that I was wearing a new black felt hatand a new black suit which was already beginning to turn into afrock coat. It was a kind of lengthened jacket that spread out intotwo little wings over the seat, and between these was a slit with apocket into which I could tuck a handkerchief--which seemed to mea grown-up, manly gesture. I felt socially elevated and by implicationaccepted into the society of men. That day, too, Sunday dinner wasan unusually good one. I would be able to stroll about in my new suitall day. But otherwise I was empty and did not know what I wasfeeling.Only gradually, in the course of the following days, did it dawn onme that nothing had happened. I had reached the pinnacle ofreligious initiation, had expected something--I knew not what--tohappen, and nothing at all had happened. I knew that God could dostupendous things to me, things of fire and unearthly light; but thisceremony contained no trace of God--not for me, at any rate. T o besure, there had been talk about Him, but it had all amounted to nomore than words. Among the others I had noticed nothing of thevast despair, the overpowering elation and outpouring of gracewhich for me constituted the essence of God. I had observed nosign of "communion," of "union, becoming one with..." With whom?With jesus? Y et he was only a man who had died 1860 years ago.Why should a person become one with him? He was called the"Son of God"--a demigod, therefore, like the Greek heroes: howthen could an ordinary person become one with him? This wascalled the "Christian religion," but none of it had anything to do with

God as I had experienced Him. On the other hand it was quite clearthat Jesus, the man, did have to do with God; he had despaired inGethsemane and on the cross, after having taught that God was akind and loving father. He too, then, must have seen the fearfulnessof God. That I could understand, but what was the purpose of thiswretched memorial service with the flat bread and the sour wine?Slowly I came to understand that this communion had been a fatalexperience for me. It had proved hollow; more than that, it hadproved to be a total loss. I knew that I would never again be able toparticipate in this ceremony. "Why, that is not religion at all," Ithought. "It is an absence of God; the church is a place I should notgo to. It is not life which is there, but death."I was seized with the most vehement pity for my father. All at once Iunderstood the tragedy of his profession and his life. He wasstruggling with a death whose existence he could not admit. Anabyss had opened between him and me, and I saw no possibility ofever bridging it, for it was infinite in extent. I could not plunge mydear and generous father, who in so many matters left me to myselfand had never tyrannized over me, to that despair and sacrilegewhich were necessary for an experience of divine grace. Only Godcould do that. I had no right to; it would be inhuman. God is nothuman, I thought; that is His greatness, that nothing humanimpinges on Him. He is kind and terrible--both at once--and istherefore a great Peril from which everyone naturally tries to savehimself. People cling one-sidedly to His love and goodness, for fearthey will fall victim to the tempter and destroyer. Jesus, too, hadnoticed that, and had therefore taught: "Lead us not intotemptation? My sense of union with the Church and with the humanworld, so far as I knew it, was shattered. I had, so it seemed to me,suffered the greatest defeat of my life. The religious outlook which Iimagined constituted my sole meaningful relation with the universehad disintegrated; I could no longer participate in the general faith,

but found myself involved in something inexpressible, in my secret,which I could share with no one. It was terrible and--this was theworst of it--vulgar and ridiculous also, a diabolical mockery.I began to ponder: What must one think of God? I had not inventedthat thought about God and the cathedral, still less the dream thathad befallen me at the age of three. A stronger will than mine hadimposed both on me. Had nature been responsible? But naturewas nothing other than the will of the Creator. Nor did it help toaccuse the devil, for he too was a creature of God. God alone wasreal--an annihilating fire and an indescribable grace.What about the failure of Communion to affect me? Was that myown failure? I had prepared for it in all earnestness, had hoped foran experience of grace and illumination, and nothing hadhappened. God had been absent. For God's sake I now foundmyself cut off from the Church and from my father's and everybodyelse's faith. Insofar as they all represented the Christian religion, Iwas an outsider. This knowledge filled me with a sadness whichwas to overshadow all the years until the time I entered theuniversity.I began looking in my father's relatively modest library---which inthose days seemed impressive to me--for books that would tell mewhat was known about God. At first I found only the traditionalconceptions, but not what I was seeking--a writer who thoughtindependently . At last I hit upon Biedermann's ChristlicheDogmotik, published in 1869. Here, apparently , was a man whothought for himself, who worked out his own views. I learned fromhim that religion was "a spiritual act consisting in man'sestablishing his own relationship to God." I disagreed with that, for Iunderstood religion as something that God did to me; it was an acton His part, to which I must simply yield, for He was the stronger. My"religion" recognized no human relationship to God, for how could

anyone relate to something so little known as God? I must knowmore about God in order to establish a relationship to him. InBiedermann's chapter on "The Nature of God" I found that Godshowed Himself to be a "personality to be conceived after theanalogy of the human ego: the unique, utterly supramundane egowho embraces the entire cosmos."As far as I knew the Bible, this definition seemed to fit. God has apersonality and is the ego of the universe, just as I myself am theego of my psychic and physical being. But here I encountered aformidable obstacle. Personality, after all, surely signifies character.Now, character is one thing and not another; that is to say, itinvolves certain specific attributes. But if God is everything, how canHe still possess a distinguishable character? On the other hand, ifHe does have a character, He can only be the ego of a subjective,limited world. Moreover, what kind of character or what kind ofpersonality does He have? Everything depends on that, for unlessone knows the answer one cannot establish a relationship to Him.I felt the strongest resistances to imagining God by analogy with myown ego. That seemed to me boundlessly arrogant, if not downrightblasphemous. My ego was, in any case, difficult enough for me tograsp. In the first place, I was aware that it consisted of twocontradictory aspects: No. 1 and No. 2. Second, in both its aspectsmy ego was extremely limited, subject to all possible self-deceptions and errors, moods, emotions, passions, and sins. Itsuffered far more defeats than triumphs, was childish, vain, self-seeking, defiant, in need of love, covetous, unjust, sensitive, lazy,irresponsible, and so on. T o my sorrow it lacked many of the virtuesand talents I admired and envied in others. How could this be theanalogy according to which we were to imagine the nature of God?Eagerly I looked up the other characteristics of God, and foundthem all listed in the way familiar to me from my instruction for

confirmation. I found that according to Article 172 "the mostimmediate expression of the supramundane nature of God is 1)negative: His invisibility to men," etc., "and 2) positive: His dwellingin Heaven," etc. This was disastrous, for at once there rushed to mymind the blasphemous vision which God directly or indirectly (i.e.,via the devil) had imposed on my will.Article 183 informed me that "God's supramundane nature withregard to the moral world" consists in His "justice," which is notmerely "judicial" but is also "an expression of His holy being." I hadhoped that this paragraph would say something about God's darkaspects which were giving me so much trouble: His vindictiveness,His dangerous wrathfulness, His incomprehensible conduct towardthe creatures His omnipotence had made, whose inadequacies Hemust know by virtue of that same omnipotence, and whommoreover it pleased Him to lead astray, or at least to test, eventhough He knew in advance the outcome of His experiments. What,indeed, was God's character? What would we say of a humanpersonality who behaved in this manner? I did not dare to think thisquestion out to its conclusion. And then I read that God, "althoughsufficient unto Himself and needing nothing outside Himself," hadcreated the world "out of His satisfaction," and "as a natural worldhas filled it with His goodness and as a moral world desires to fill itwith His love."At first I pondered over the perplexing word "satisfaction."Satisfaction with what or with whom? Obviously with the world, forHe had looked upon His work and called it good. But it was just thisthat I had never understood. Certainly the world is immeasurablybeautiful, but it is quite as horrible. In a small village in the country,where there are few people and nothing much happens, "old age,disease, and death" are experienced more intensely, in greaterdetail, and more nakedly than elsewhere. Although I was not yetsixteen years old I had seen a great deal of the reality of the life of

man and beast, and in church and school I had heard enough of thesufferings and corruption of the world. God could at most have felt"satisfaction" with paradise, but then He Himself had taken goodcare that the glory of paradise should not last too long by planting init that poisonous serpent, the devil. Had He taken satisfaction inthat too?I felt certain that Biedermann did not mean this, but was simplybabbling on in that mindless way that characterized religiousinstruction, not even aware that he was writing nonsense. As I sawit, it was not at all unreasonable to suppose that God, for all that Heprobably did not feel any such cruel satisfaction in the unmeritedsufferings of man and beast, had nevertheless intended to create aworld of contradictions in which one creature devoured another andlife meant simply being born to die. The "wonderful harmonies" ofnatural law looked to me more like a chaos tamed by fearful effort,and the "eternal" starry firmament with its predetermined orbitsseemed plainly an accumulation of random bodies without order ormeaning. For no one could really see the constellations peoplespoke about. They were mere arbitrary configurations.I either did not see or gravely doubted that God filled the naturalworld with His goodness. This, apparently, was another of thosepoints which must not be reasoned about but must be believed. Infact, if God is the highest good, why is the world, His creation, soimperfect, so corrupt, so pitiable? "Obviously it has been infectedand thrown into confusion by the devil," I thought. But the devil, too,was a creature of God. I had to read up on the devil. He seemed tobe highly important after all. I again opened Biedermann's book onChristian dogmatics and looked for the answer to this burningquestion. What were the reasons for suffering, imperfection, andevil? I could find nothing.That finished it for me. This weighty tome on dogmatics was nothing

but fancy drivel; worse still, it was a fraud or a specimen ofuncommon stupidity whose sole aim was to obscure the truth. I wasdisillusioned and even indignant, and once more seized with pity formy father, who had fallen victim to this mumbo-jumbo.But somewhere and at some time there must have been peoplewho sought the truth as I was doing, who thought rationally and didnot wish to deceive themselves and others and deny the sorrowfulreality of the world. It was about this time that my mother, or rather,her No. 2 personality, suddenly and without preamble said, "Youmust read Goethe's Faust one of these days." We had a handsomeedition of Goethe, and I picked out Faust. It poured into my soul likea miraculous balm. "Here at last," I thought, "is someone who takesthe devil seriously and even concludes a blood pact with him--withthe adversary who has the power to frustrate God's plan to make aperfect world." I regretted Faust's behavior, for to my mind heshould not have been so one-sided and so easily tricked. He shouldhave been cleverer and also more moral. How childish he was togamble away his soul so frivolously! Faust was plainly a bit of awindbag. I had the impression that the weight of the drama and itssignificance lay chiefly on the side of Mephistopheles. It would nothave grieved me if Faust's soul had gone to hell. He deserved it. Idid not like the idea of the "cheated devil" at the end, for after allMephistopheles had been anything but a stupid devil, and it wascontrary to logic for him to be tricked by silly little angels.Mephistopheles seemed to me cheated in quite a different sense:he had not received his promised rights because Faust, thatsomewhat characterless fellow, had carried his swindle throughright into the Hereafter. There, admittedly, his puerility came to light,but, as I saw it, he did not deserve the initiation into the greatmysteries. I would have given him a taste of purgatorial fires. Thereal problem, it seemed to me, lay with Mephistopheles, whosewhole figure made the deepest impression on me, and who, I

vaguely sensed, had a relationship to the mystery of the Mothers. Atany rate Mephistopheles and the great initiation at the endremained for me a wonderful and mysterious experience on thefringes of my conscious world.At last I had found confirmation that there were or had been peoplewho saw evil and its universal power, and--more important--themysterious role it played in delivering man from darkness andsuffering. T o that extent Goethe became, in my eyes, a prophet. ButI could not forgive him for having dismissed Mephistopheles by amere trick, by a bit of jiggery-pokery.* "Faust, Part T wo, trans. by Philip Wayne (Harmondsworth, England,Penguin Books Ltd, 1959), pp. 76ff. 60For me that was too theological, too frivolous and irresponsible,and I was deeply sorry that Goethe too had fallen for those cunningdevices by which evil is rendered innocuous. In reading the drama Ihad discovered that Faust had been a philosopher of sorts, andalthough he turned away from philosophy, he had obviously learnedfrom it a certain receptivity to the truth. Hitherto I had heard virtuallynothing of philosophy, and now a new hope dawned. Perhaps, Ithought, there were philosophers who had grappled with thesequestions and could shed light on them for me.Since there were no philosophers in my father's library--they weresuspect because they thought--I had to content myself with Krug'sGeneral Dictionary of the Philosophical Sciences, second edition,1832; I plunged forthwith into the article on God. T o my discontent itbegan with the etymology of the word "God," which, it said,"incontestably" derived from "good" and signified the ens summumor perfectissimum. The existence of God could not be proved, itcontinued, nor the innateness of the idea of God. The latter,however, could exist a priori in man, if not in actuality at any rate

potentially. In any case our "intellectual powers" must "already bedeveloped to a certain degree before they are capable ofengendering so sublime an idea."This explanation astounded me beyond measure. What is wrongwith these "philosophers"? I wondered. Evidently they know of Godonly by hearsay. The theologians are different in this respect, at anyrate; at least they are sure that God exists, even though they makecontradictory statements about Him. This lexicographer Krugexpresses himself in so involved a manner that it is easy to see hewould like to assert that he is already sufficiently convinced of God'sexistence. Then why doesn't he say so outright? Why does hepretend--as if he really thought that we "engender" the idea of God,and to do so must first have reached a certain level ofdevelopment? So far as I knew, even the savages wandering nakedin their jungles had such ideas. And they were certainly not"philosophers" who sat down to "engender an idea of God." I neverengendered any idea of God, either. Of course God cannot beproved, for how could, say, a clothes moth that eats Australian woolprove to other moths that Australia exists? God's existence doesnot depend on our proofs. How had I arrived at my certainty aboutGod? I was told all sorts of things about Him, yet I could believenothing. None of it convinced me. That was not where my ideacame from. In fact it was not an idea at all--that is, not somethingthought out. It was not like imagining something and thinking it outand afterward believing it. For example, all that about Lord Jesuswas always suspect to me and I never really believed it, although itwas impressed upon me far more than God, who was usually onlyhinted at in the background. Why have I come to take God forgranted? Why do these philosophers pretend that God is an idea, akind of arbitrary assumption which they can engender or not, when itis perfectly plain that He exists, as plain as a brick that falls on yourhead?

Suddenly I understood that God was, for me at least, one of themost certain and immediate of experiences. After all, I didn't inventthat horrible image about the cathedral. On the contrary, it wasforced on me and I was compelled, with the utmost cruelty, to thinkit, and afterward that inexpressible feeling of grace came to me. Ihad no control over these things. I came to the conclusion that theremust be something the matter with these philosophers, for they hadthe curious notion that God was a kind of hypothesis that could bediscussed. I also found it extremely unsatisfying that thephilosophers offered no opinions or explanations about the darkdeeds of God. These, it seemed to me, merited special attentionand consideration from philosophy, since they constituted aproblem which, I gathered, was rather a hard one for thetheologians. All the greater was my disappointment to discover thatthe philosophers had apparently never even heard of it.I therefore passed on to the next topic that interested me, the articleon the devil. If I read, we conceived of the devil as originally evil, wewould become entangled in patent contradictions, that is to say wewould fall into dualism. Therefore we would do better to assume thatthe devil was originally created a good being but had beencorrupted by his pride. However; as the author of the article pointedout--and I was glad to see this point made--this hypothesispresupposed the evil it was attempting to explain--namely, pride.For the rest, he continued, the origin of evil was "unexplained andinexplicable"--which meant to me: Like the theologians, he does notwant to think about it. The article on evil and its origin provedequally unilluminating.The account I have given here summarizes trains of thought anddevelopments of ideas which, broken by long. intervals, extendedover several years. They went on exclusively in my No. 2personality, and were strictly private. I used my father's library for

these researches, secretly and without asking his permission. In theintervals, personality No. 1 openly read all the novels of Gerstacker,and German translations of the classic English novels. I also beganreading German literature, concentrating on those classics whichschool, with its needlessly laborious explanations of the obvious,had not spoiled for me. I read vastly and planlessly, drama, poetry,history, and later natural science. Reading was not only interestingbut provided a welcome and beneficial distraction from thepreoccupations of personality No. 2., which in increasing measurewere leading me to depressions. For everywhere in the realm ofreligious questions I encountered only locked doors, and if ever onedoor should chance to open I was disappointed by what lay behindit. Other people all seemed to have totally different concerns. I feltcompletely alone with my certainties. More than ever I wantedsomeone to talk with, but nowhere did I find a point of contact; onthe contrary, I sensed in others an estrangement, a distrust, anapprehension which robbed me of speech. That, too, depressedme. I did not know what to make of it. Why has no one hadexperiences similar to mine? I wondered. Why is there nothingabout it in scholarly books? Am I the only one who has had suchexperiences? Why should I be the only one? It never occurred to methat I might be crazy, for the light and darkness of God seemed tome facts that could be understood even though they oppressed myfeelings.I felt the singularity into which I was being forced as somethingthreatening, for it meant isolation, and that seemed all the moreunpleasant to me as I was unjustly taken for a scapegoat a gooddeal more often than I liked. Moreover, something had happened inschool to increase my isolation. In the German class I was rathermediocre, for the subject matter, especially German grammar andsyntax, did not interest me at all. I was lazy and bored. The subjectsfor composition usually seemed to me shallow or silly, and my

essays turned out accordingly: either careless or labored. I slippedthrough with average marks, and this suited me very well, as it fittedin with my general tendency not to be conspicuous. On the whole Isympathized with boys from poor families who, like myself, hadcome from nowhere, and I had a liking for those who were none toobright, though I tended to become excessively irritated by theirstupidity and ignorance. For the fact of the matter was that they hadsomething to offer which I craved deeply: in their simplicity theynoticed nothing unusual about me. My "unusualness" was graduallybeginning to give me the disagreeable, rather uncanny feeling that Imust possess repulsive traits, of which I was not aware, that causedmy teachers and schoolmates to shun me.In the midst of these preoccupations the following incident burst onme like a thunderclap. We had been assigned a subject forcomposition which for once interested me. Consequently I set towork with a will and produced what seemed to me a carefully writtenand successful paper. I hoped to receive at least one of the highestmarks for it--not the highest, of course, for that would have mademe conspicuous, but one close to the top. Our teacher was in thehabit of discussing the compositions in order of merit. The first onehe turned to was by the boy at the head of the class. That was allright. Then followed the compositions of the others, and I waitedand waited in vain for my name. Still it did not come. "It just can'tbe," I thought, "that mine is so bad that it is even below these poorones he has come to. What can be the matter?" Was I simply horsconcours--which would mean being isolated and attracting attentionin the most dreadful way of all?When all the essays had been read, the teacher paused. Then hesaid, "Now I have one more composition--Jung's. It is by far thebest, and I ought to have given it first place. But unfortunately it is afraud. Where did you copy it from? Confess the truth!"

I shot to my feet, as horrified as I was furious, and cried, "I did notcopy it! I went to a lot of trouble to write a good composition." Butthe teacher shouted at me, "Y ou're lyingl Y ou could never write acomposition like this. No one is going to believe that. Now--wheredid you copy it from?"Vainly I swore to my innocence. The teacher clung to his theory. Hebecame threatening. "I can tell you this: if I knew where you hadcopied it from, you would be chucked out of the schooI." And heturned away. My classmates threw odd glances at me, and Irealized with horror that they were thinking, "A-ha, so that's the wayit is." My protestations fell on deaf ears.I felt that from now on I was branded, and that all the paths whichmight have led me out of unusualness had been cut off. Profoundlydisheartened and dishonored, I swore vengeance on the teacher,and if I had had an opportunity something straight out of the law ofthe jungle would have resulted. How in the world could I possiblyprove that I had not copied the essay?For days I turned this incident over in my thoughts, and again andagain came to the conclusion that I was powerless, the sport of ablind and stupid fate that had marked me as a liar and a cheat. NowI realized many things I had not previously understood--for example,how it was that one of the teachers could say to my father, who hadinquired about my conduct in school, "Oh, he's just average, but heworks commendably hard." I was thought to be relatively stupid andsuperficial. That did not annoy me really. But what made me furiouswas that they should think me capable of cheating, and thus morallydestroy me.My grief and rage threatened to get out of control. And thensomething happened that I had already observed in myself severaltimes before: there was a sudden inner silence, as though a

soundproof door had been closed on a noisy room. It was as if amood of cool curiosity came over me, and I asked myself, "What isreally going on here? All right, you are excited. Of course theteacher is an idiot who doesn't understand your nature--that is,doesn't understand it any more than you do. Therefore he is asmistrustful as you are. Y ou distrust yourself and others, and that iswhy you side with those who are naive, simple, and easily seenthrough. One gets excited when one doesn't understand things."In the light of these considerations 'sine ira et studio', I was struckby the analogy with that other train of ideas which had impresseditself on me so forcefully when I did not want to think the forbiddenthought. Although at that time I doubtless saw no difference as yetbetween personalities No. 1 and No. 2, and still claimed the worldof No. 2 as my own personal world, there was always, deep in thebackground, the feeling that something other than myself wasinvolved. It was as though a breath of the great world of stars andendless space had touched me, or as if a spirit had invisiblyentered the room--the spirit of one who had long been dead and yetwas perpetually present in timelessness until far into the future.Denouements of this sort were wreathed with the halo of a numen.At that time, of course, I could never have expressed myself in thisfashion, nor am I now attributing to my state of consciousnesssomething that was not there at the time. I am only trying to expressthe feelings I had then, and to shed light on that twilight world withthe help of what I know now.It was some months after the incident just described that myschoolmates hung the nickname "Father Abraham" on me. No. 1could not understand why, and thought it silly and ridiculous. Y etsomewhere in the background I felt that the name had hit the mark.All allusions to this background were painful to me, for the more Iread and the more familiar I became with city life, the stronger grew

my impression that what I was now getting to know as realitybelonged to an order of things different from the view of the world Ihad grown up with in the country, among rivers and woods, amongmen and animals in a small village bathed in sunlight, with the windsand the clouds moving over it, and encompassed by dark night inwhich uncertain things happened. It was no mere locality on themap, but "God's world," so ordered by Him and filled with secretmeaning. But apparently men did not know this, and even theanimals had somehow lost the senses to perceive it. That wasevident, for example, in the sorrowful, lost look of the cows, and inthe resigned eyes of horses, in the devotion of dogs, who clung sodesperately to human beings, and even in the self-assured step ofthe cats who had chosen house and barn as their residence andhunting ground. People were like the animals, and seemed asunconscious as they. They looked down upon the ground or up intothe trees in order to see what could be put to use, and for whatpurpose; like annuals they herded, paired, and fought, but did notsee that they dwelt in a unified cosmos, in God's world, in aneternity where everything is already born and everything has alreadydied.Because they are so closely akin to us and share ourunknowingness, I loved all warm-blooded animals who have soulslike ourselves and with whom, so I thought, we have an instinctiveunderstanding. We experience joy and sorrow, love and hate,hunger and thirst, fear and trust in common--all the essentialfeatures of existence with the exception of speech, sharpenedconsciousness, and science. And although I admired science in theconventional way, I also saw it giving rise to alienation andaberration from God's world, as leading to a degeneration whichanimals were not capable of. Animals were dear and faithful,unchanging and trustworthy. People I now distrusted more thanever.

Insects I did not regard as proper animals, and I took coldbloodedvertebrates to be a rather lowly intermediate stage on the way downto the insects. Creatures in this category were objects forobservation and collection, curiosities merely, alien and extra-human; they were manifestations of impersonal life and more akinto plants than to human beings.The earthly manifestations of "God's world" began with the realm ofplants, as a kind of direct communication from it. It was as thoughone were peering over the shoulder of the Creator, who, thinkingHimself unobserved, was making toys and decorations. Man andthe proper animals, on the other hand, were bits of God that hadbecome independent. That was why they could move about on theirown and choose their abodes. Plants were bound for good or ill totheir places. They expressed not only the beauty but also thethoughts of God's world, with no intent of their own and withoutdeviation. Trees in particular were mysterious and seemed to medirect embodiments of the incomprehensible meaning of life. Forthat reason the woods were the place where I felt closest to itsdeepest meaning and to its awe-inspiring workings.This impression was reinforced when I became acquainted withGothic cathedrals. But there the infinity of the cosmos, the chaos ofmeaning and meaninglessness, of impersonal purpose andmechanical law, were wrapped in stone. This contained and at thesame time was the bottomless mystery of being, the embodiment ofspirit. What I dimly felt to be my kinship with stone was the divinenature in both, in the dead and the living matter.At that time it would, as I have said, have been beyond my powersto formulate my feelings and intuition in any graphic way, for they alloccurred in No. 2 personality, while my active and comprehendingego remained passive and was absorbed into the sphere of the"old man," who belonged to the centuries. I experienced him and

his influence in a curiously unreflective manner; when he waspresent, No. 1 personality paled to the point of nonexistence, andwhen the ego that became increasingly identical with No. 1personality dominated the scene, the old man, if remembered at all,seemed a remote and unreal dream.Between my sixteenth and nineteenth years the fog of my dilemmaslowly lifted, and my depressive states of mind improved. No. 1personality emerged more and more distinctly. School and city lifetook up my time, and my increased knowledge graduallypermeated or repressed the world of intuitive premonitions. I begansystematically pursuing questions I had consciously framed. I read abrief introduction to the history of philosophy and in this way gaineda bird's-eye view of everything that had been thought in this field. Ifound to my gratification that many of my intuitions had historicalanalogues. Above all I was attracted to the thought of Pythagoras,Heraclitus, Empedocles, and Plato, despite the long-windedness ofSocratic argumentation. Their ideas were beautiful and academic,like pictures in a gallery, but somewhat remote. Only in MeisterEckhart did I feel the breath of life--not that I understood him. TheSchoolmen left me cold, and the Aristotelian intellectualism of St.Thomas appeared to me more lifeless than a desert. I thought,"They all want to force something to come out by tricks of logic,something they have not been granted and do not really knowabout. They want to prove a belief to themselves, whereas actually itis a matter of experience? They seemed to me like people whoknew by hearsay that elephants existed, but had never seen one,and were now trying to prove by arguments that on logical groundssuch animals must exist and must be constituted as in fact they are.For obvious reasons, the critical philosophy of the eighteenthcentury at first did not appeal to me at all. Of the nineteenth-centuryphilosophers, Hegel put me off by his language, as arrogant as itwas laborious; I regarded him with downright mistrust. He seemed

to me like a man who was caged in the edifice of his own wordsand was pompously gesticulating in his prison.But the great find resulting from my researches was Schopenhauer.He was the first to speak of the suffering of the world, which visiblyand glaringly surrounds us, and of confusion, passion, evil--all thosethings which the others hardly seemed to notice and always tried toresolve into all-embracing harmony and comprehensibility. Here atlast was a philosopher who had the courage to see that all was notfor the best in the fundaments of the universe. He spoke neither ofthe all-good and all-wise providence of a Creator, nor of theharmony of the cosmos, but stated bluntly that a fundamental flawunderlay the sorrowful course of human history and the cruelty ofnature: the blindness of the world-creating Will. This was confirmednot only by the early observations I had made of diseased anddying fishes, of mangy foxes, frozen or starved birds, of the pitilesstragedies concealed in a flowery meadow: earthworms tormentedto death by ants, insects that tore each other apart piece by piece,and so on. My experiences with human beings, too, had taught meanything rather than a belief in man's original goodness anddecency. I knew myself well enough to know that I was onlygradually, as it were, distinguishing myself from an animal.Schopenhauer's somber picture of the world had my undividedapproval, but not his solution of the problem. I felt sure that by "Will"he really meant God, the Creator, and that he was saying that Godwas blind. Since I knew from experience that God was not offendedby any blasphemy, that on the contrary He could even encourage itbecause He wished to evoke not only man's bright and positiveside but also his darkness and ungodliness, Schopenhauer's viewdid not distress me. I considered it a verdict justified by the facts.But I was all the more disappointed by his theory that the intellectneed only confront the blind Will with its image in order to cause it toreverse itself. How could the Will see this image at all, since it was

blind? And why should it, even if it could see, thereby be persuadedto reverse itself, since the image would show it precisely what itwilled? And what was the intellect? It was a function of the humansoul, not a mirror but an infinitesimal fragment of a mirror such as achild might hold up to the sun, expecting the sun to be dazzled by it.I was puzzled that Schopenhauer should ever have been satisfiedwith such an inadequate answer.Because of this I was impelled to study him more thoroughly , and Ibecame increasingly impressed by his relation to Kant. I thereforebegan reading the works of this philosopher, above all his Critiqueof Pure Reason, which put me to some hard thinking. My effortswere rewarded, for I discovered the fundamental flaw, so I thought,in Schopenhauer's system. He had committed the deadly sin ofhypostatizing a metaphysical assertion, and of endowing a merenoumenon, a Ding an sich, with special qualities. I got this fromKant's theory of knowledge, and it afforded me an even greaterillumination, if that were possible, than Schopenhauer's"pessimistic" view of the world.This philosophical development extended from my seventeenthyear until well into the period of my medical studies. It brought abouta revolutionary alteration of my attitude to the world and to life.Whereas formerly I had been shy, timid, mistrustful, pallid, thin, andapparently unstable in health, I now began to display a tremendousappetite on all fronts. I knew what I wanted and went after it. I alsobecame noticeably more accessible and more communicative. Idiscovered that poverty was no handicap and was far from beingthe principal reason for suffering; that the sons of the rich really didnot enjoy any advantages over the poor and ill-clad boys. Therewere far deeper reasons for happiness and unhappiness than one'sallotment of pocket money. I made more and better friends thanbefore. I felt firmer ground under my feet and even summoned up

courage to speak openly of my ideas. But that, as I discovered alltoo soon, was a misunderstanding which I had cause to regret. For Imet not only with embarrassment or mockery, but with hostilerejection. T o my consternation and discomfiture, I found that certainpeople considered me a braggart, a poseur, and a humbug. Theold charge of cheat was revived, even though in a somewhat milderform. Once again it had to do with a subject for composition thathad aroused my interest. I had worked out my paper with particularcare, taking the greatest pains to polish my style. The result wascrushing. "Here is an essay by Jung," said the teacher. "It isdownright brilliant, but tossed off so carelessly that it is easy to seehow little serious effort went into it. I can tell you this, Jung, you won'tget through life with that slapdash attitude. Life calls for earnestnessand conscientiousness, work and effort. Look at D.'s paper. He hasnone of your brilliance, but he is honest, conscientious, and hard-working. That is the way to success in life."My feelings were not as hurt as on the first occasion, for in spite ofhimself the teacher had been impressed by my essay, and had atleast not accused me of stealing it. I protested against hisreproaches, but was dismissed with the comment: "The ArsPoetico maintains that the best poem is the one which conceals theeffort of creation. But you cannot make me believe that about youressay, for it was tossed off frivolously and without any effort." Therewere, I knew, a few good ideas in it, but the teacher did not evenbother to discuss them.I felt some bitterness over this incident, but the suspicions of myschoohnates were a far more serious matter, for they threatened tothrow me back into my former isolation and depression. I racked mybrains, trying to understand what I could have done to deserve theirslanders. By cautious inquiries I discovered that they lookedaskance at me because I often made remarks, or dropped hints,about things which I could not possibly know. For instance, I

pretended to know something about Kant and Schopenhauer, orabout paleontology, which we had not even had in school as yet.These astonishing discoveries showed me that practically all theburning questions had nothing to do with everyday life, butbelonged, like my ultimate secret, to "God's world," which it wasbetter not to speak of.Henceforth I took care not to mention these esoteric matters amongmy schoolmates, and among the adults of my acquaintance I knewno one with whom I might have talked without risk of being thought aboaster and impostor. The most painful thing of all was thefrustration of my attempts to overcome the inner split in myself, mydivision into two worlds. Again and again events occurred whichforced me out of my ordinary, everyday existence into theboundlessness of "God's world."This expression, "God's world," may sound sentimental to someears. For me it did not have this character at all. T o "God's world"belonged everything superhuman--dazzling light, the darkness ofthe abyss, the cold impassivity of infinite space and time, and theuncanny grotesqueness of the irrational world of chance. "God," forme, was everything--and anything but "edifying."The older I grew, the more frequently I was asked by my parentsand others what I wanted to be. I had no clear notions on that score.My interests drew me in different directions. On the one hand I waspowerfully attracted by science, with its truths based on facts; on theother hand I was fascinated by everything to do with comparativereligion. In the sciences I was drawn principally to zoology,paleontology, and geology; in the humanities to Greco-Roman,Egyptian, and prehistoric archaeology . At that time, of course, I didnot realize how very much this choice of the most varied subjectscorresponded to the nature of my inner dichotomy. What appealedto me in science were the concrete facts and their historical

background, and in comparative religion the spiritual problems, intowhich philosophy also entered. In science I missed the factor ofmeaning; and in religion, that of empiricism. Science met, to a verylarge extent, the needs of No. 1 personality, whereas the humane orhistorical studies provided beneficial instruction for No. 2.To r n b e t we e n t he s e  t wo  p o l e s ,  I wa s  f o r  a  l o ng  t i m e  una b l e  t o  s e t t l eon anything. I noticed that my uncle, the head of my mother's family,who was pastor of St. Alban's in Basel, was gently pushing me inthe direction of theology. The unusual attentiveness with which I hadfollowed a conversation at table, when he was discussing a point ofreligion with one of his sons, all of whom were theologians, had notescaped him. I wondered whether there might possibly betheologians who were in close touch with the dizzy heights of theuniversity and therefore knew more than my father. Suchconversations never gave me the impression that they wereconcerned with real experiences, and certainly not with experienceslike mine. They dealt exclusively with doctrinal opinions on theBiblical narratives, all of which made me feel distinctlyuncomfortable, because of the numerous and barely credibleaccounts of miracles.While I was attending the Gymnasium I was allowed to lunch at thisuncle's house every Thursday. I was grateful to him not only for thelunch but for the unique opportunity of occasionally hearing at histable an adult, intelligent, and intellectual conversation. It was amarvelous experience for me to discover that anything of this sortexisted at all, for in my home surroundings I had never heardanyone discussing learned topics. I did sometimes attempt to talkseriously with my father, but encountered an impatience andanxious defensiveness which puzzled me. Not until several yearslater did I come to understand that my poor father did not dare tothink, because he was consumed by inward doubts. He was takingrefuge from himself and therefore insisted on blind faith. He could

not receive it as a grace because he wanted to "win it by struggle,"forcing it to come with convulsive efforts.My uncle and my cousins could calmly discuss the dogmas anddoctrines of the Church Fathers and the opinions of modemtheologians. They seemed safely ensconced in a self-evident worldorder, in which the name of Nietzsche did not occur at all and JakobBurckhardt was paid only a grudging compliment. Burckhardt was"liberal," "rather too much of a freethinker"; I gathered that he stoodsomewhat askew in the eternal order of things. My uncle, I knew,never suspected how remote I was from theology, and I was deeplysorry to have to disappoint him. I would never have dared to lay myproblems before him, since I knew only too well how disastrouslythis would turn out for me. I had nothing to say in my defense. On thecontrary, No. 1 personality was fast taking the lead, and myscientific knowledge, though still meager, was thoroughly saturatedwith the scientific materialism of the time. It was only painfully held incheck by the evidence of history and by Kant's Critique of PureReason, which apparently nobody in my environment understood.For although Kant was mentioned by my theologian uncle andcousins in tones of praise, his principles were used only to discreditopposing views but were never applied to their own. About this, too,I said nothing.Consequently , I began to feel more and more uncomfortable when Isat down to table with my uncle and his family. Given my habituallyguilty conscience, these Thursdays became black days for me. Inthis world of social and spiritual security and ease I felt less andless at home, although I thirsted for the drops of intellectualstimulation which occasionally trickled forth. I felt dishonest andashamed. I had to admit to myself: "Y es, you are a cheat; you lieand deceive people who mean well by you. It's not their fault thatthey live in a world of social and intellectual certitudes, that theyknow nothing of poverty, that their religion is also their paid

profession, that they are totally unconscious of the fact that GodHimself can wrench a person out of his orderly spiritual world andcondemn him to blaspheme. I have no way of explaining this tothem. I must take the odium on myself and learn to bear it."Unfortunately, I had so far been singularly unsuccessful in thisendeavor.As the tensions of this moral conflict increased, No. 2 personalitybecame more and more doubtful and distasteful to me, and I couldno longer hide this fact from myself. I tried to extinguish No. 2, butcould not succeed in that either. At school and in the presence ofmy friends I could forget him, and he also disappeared when I wasstudying science. But as soon as I was by myself, at home or out inthe country, Schopenhauer and Kant returned in full force, and withthem the grandeur of "God's world." My scientific knowledge alsoformed a part of it, and filled the great canvas with vivid colors andfigures. Then No. 1 and his worries about the choice of a professionsank below the horizon, a tiny episode in the last decade of thenineteenth century. But when I returned from my expedition into thecenturies, I brought with me a kind of hangover. I, or rather No. 1,lived in the here and now, and sooner or later would have to form adefinite idea of what profession he wished to pursue.Several times my father had a serious talk with me. I was free tostudy anything I liked, he said, but if I wanted his advice I shouldkeep away from theology. "Be anything you like except atheologian," he said emphatically. By this time there was a tacitagreement between us that certain things could be said or donewithout comment. He had never taken me to task for cutting churchas often as possible and for not going to communion any more. Thefarther away I was from church, the better I felt. The only things Imissed were the organ and the choral music, but certainly not the"religious community? The phrase meant nothing to me at all, for

the habitual churchgoers struck me as being far less of acommunity than the "worldly" folk. The latter may have been lessvirtuous, but on the other hand they were much nicer people, withnatural emotions, more sociable and cheerful, warmer-hearted andmore sincere.I was able to reassure my father that I had not the slightest desire tobe a theologian. But I continued to waver between science and thehumanities. Both powerfully attracted me. I was beginning to realizethat No. 2 had no pied-a-terre. In him I was lifted beyond the hereand now; in him I felt myself a single eye in a thousand-eyeduniverse, but incapable of moving so much as a pebble upon theearth. No. 1 rebelled against this passivity; he wanted to be up anddoing, but for the present he was caught in an insoluble conflict.Obviously I had to wait and see what would happen. If anyoneasked me what I wanted to be I was in the habit of replying: aphilologist, by which I secretly meant Assyrian and Egyptianarchaeology. In reality, however, I continued to study science andphilosophy in my leisure hours, and particularly during the holidays,which I spent at home with my mother and sister. The days werelong past when I ran to my mother, lamenting, "I'm bored, I don'tknow what to do." Holidays were now the best time of the year,when I could amuse myself alone. Moreover, during the summervacations at least, my father was away, as he used regularly tospend his holidays in Sachseln.Only once did it happen that I too went on a vacation trip. I wasfourteen when, on our doctor's orders, I was sent to Entlebuch for acure, in the hope that my fitful appetite and my then unstable healthwould be improved. For the first time I was alone among adultstrangers. I was quartered in the Catholic priest's house. For methis was an eerie and at the same time fascinating adventure. Iseldom got a glimpse of the priest himself, and his housekeeperwas scarcely an alarming person, though prone to be curt. Nothing

in the least menacing happened to me. I was under the supervisionof an old country doctor who ran a kind of hotel-sanatorium forconvalescents of all types. It was a very mixed group: farm people,minor officials, merchants, and a few cultivated people from Basel,among them a chemist who had attained that pinnacle of glory, thedoctorate. My father, too, was a Ph.D., but he was merely aphilologist and linguist. This chemist was a fascinating novelty tome: here was a scientist, perhaps one of those who understood thesecrets of stones. He was still a young man and taught me to playcroquet, but he imparted to me none of his presumably vastlearning. And I was too shy, too awkward, and far too ignorant toask him. I revered him as the first person I had ever met in the fleshwho was initiated into the secrets of nature, or some of them, atleast. He sat at the same table with me, ate the same food as I did,and occasionally even exchanged a few words with me. I felttransported into the sublimer sphere of adulthood. This elevation inmy status was confirmed when I was permitted to go on the outingsarranged for the boarders. On one of these occasions we visited adistillery, and were invited to sample the wares. In literal fulfillment ofthe verse:But now there comes a kicker, This stuff, you see, is liquor [6]6 Wilhelm Busch, Die Iobsiade.I found the various little glasses so inspiring that I was wafted intoan entirely new and unexpected state of consciousness. There wasno longer any inside or outside, no longer an "I" and the "others,"No. 1 and No. 2 were no more; caution and timidity were gone, andthe earth and sky, the universe and everything in it that creeps andflies, revolves, rises, or falls, had all become one. I was shamefully,gloriously, triumphantly drunk. It was as if I were drowned in a sea ofblissful musings, but, because of the violent heaving of the waves,

had to cling with eyes, hands, and feet to all solid objects in order tokeep my balance on the swaying streets and between the rockinghouses and trees. "Marvelous," I thought, "only unfortunately just alittle too much." The experience came to a rather woeful end, but itnevertheless remained a discovery, a premonition of beauty andmeaning which I had spoiled only by my stupidity.At the end of my stay my father came to fetch me, and we traveledtogether to Lucerne, where--what happinessl--we went aboard asteamship. I had never seen anything like it. I could not see enoughof the action of the steam engine, and then suddenly I was told wehad arrived in Vitznau. Above the village towered a high mountain,and my father now explained to me that this was the Rigi, and that acogwheel railway ran up it. We went to a small station building, andthere stood the strangest locomotive in the world, with the boilerupright but tilted at a queer angle. Even the seats in the carriagewere tilted. My father pressed a ticket into my hand and said, "Youcan ride up to the peak alone. I'll stay here, it's too expensive for thetwo of us. Be careful not to fall down anywhere."I was speechless with joy. Here I was at the foot of this mightymountain, higher than any I had ever seen, and quite close to thefiery peaks of my faraway childhood. I was, indeed, almost a manby now. For this trip I had bought myself a bamboo cane and anEnglish jockey cap--the proper articles of dress for a World traveler.And now I was to ascend this enormous mountain! I no longer knewwhich was bigger, I or the mountain. With a tremendous puffing, thewonderful locomotive shook and rattled me up to the dizzy heightswhere ever-new abysses and Panoramas opened out before mygaze, until at last I stood on the peak in the strange thin air, lookinginto unimaginable distances. "Y es," I thought, "this is it, my world,the real world, the secret, where there are no teachers, no schools,no unanswerable questions, where one can be without having toask anything." I kept carefully to the paths, for there were

tremendous precipices all around. It was all very solemn, and I feltone had to be polite and silent up here, for one was in God's world.Here it was physically present. This was the best and most preciousgift my father had ever given me.So profound was the impression this made upon me that mymemories of everything that happened afterward in "God's world"were completely blotted out. But No. 1 also came into his own onthis trip, and his impressions remained with me for the rest of mylife. I still see myself, grown up and independent, wearing a stiffblack hat and with an expensive cane, sitting on the terrace of oneof the overwhelmingly elegant palatial hotels beside Lake Lucerne,or in the beautiful gardens of Vitznau, having my morning coffee at asmall, white-covered table under a striped awning spangled withsunlight, eating croissants with golden butter and various kinds ofjam, and considering plans for outings that would fill the whole longsummer day. After the coffee I would stroll calmly, withoutexcitement and at a deliberate pace, to a steamship, which wouldcarry me toward the Gotthard and the foot of those giant mountainswhose tops were covered with gleaming glaciers.For many decades this image rose up whenever I was weariedfrom overwork and sought a point of rest. In real life I have promisedmyself this splendor again and again, but I have never kept mypromise.This, my first conscious journey, was followed by a second a year ortwo later. I had been allowed to visit my father, who was on holidayin Sachseln. From him I learned the impressive news that he hadbecome friendly with the Catholic priest there. This seemed to mean act of extraordinary boldness, and secretly I admired my father'scourage. While there, I paid a visit to the hermitage of Flueli and therelics of Brother Klaus, who by then had been beatified. I wonderedhow the Catholics knew that he was in a beatific state. Perhaps he

was still wandering about and had told people so? I was powerfullyimpressed by the genius loci, and was able not only to imagine thepossibility of a life so entirely dedicated to God but even tounderstand it. But I did so with an inward shudder and a question towhich I knew no answer: How could his wife and children haveborne having a saint for a husband and father, when it was preciselymy father's faults and inadequacies that made him particularlylovable to me? "Yes," I thought, "how could anyone live with asaint?" Obviously he saw that it was impossible, and therefore hehad to become a hermit. Still, it was not so very far from his cell tohis house. This wasn't a bad idea, I thought, to have the family inone house, while I would live some distance away, in a hut with apile of books and a writing table, and an open fire where I wouldroast chestnuts and cook my soup on a tripod. As a holy hermit Iwouldn't have to go to church any more, but would have my ownprivate chapel instead.From the hermitage I strolled on up the hill, lost in my thoughts, andwas just turning to descend when from the left the slender figure of ayoung girl appeared. She wore the local costume, had a pretty face,and greeted me with friendly blue eyes. As though it were the mostnatural thing. in the world we descended into the valley together.She was about my own age. Since I knew no other girls except mycousins, I felt rather embarrassed and did not know how to talk toher. So I began hesitantly explaining that I was here for a couple ofdays on holiday, that I was at the Gymnasium in Basel and laterwanted to study at the university. While I was talking, a strangefeeling of fatefulness crept over me. "She has appeared just at thismoment," I thought to myself, "and she walks along with me asnaturally as if we belonged together? I glanced sideways at her andsaw an expression of mingled shyness and admiration in her face,which embarrassed me and somehow pierced me. Can it bepossible, I wondered, that this is fate? Is my meeting her mere

chance? A peasant girl--could it possibly be? She is a Catholic, butperhaps her priest is the very one with whom my father has madefriends? She has no idea who I am. I certainly couldn't talk to herabout Schopenhauer and the negation of the Will, could I? Y et shedoesn't seem in any way sinister. Perhaps her Priest is not one ofthose Jesuits skulking about in black robes.But I cannot tell her, either, that my father is a Protestant clergyman.That might frighten or offend her. And to talk about philosophy, orabout the devil, who is more important than Faust even thoughGoethe made such a simpleton of him--that is quite out of thequestion. She still dwells in the distant land of innocence, but I haveplunged into reality, into the splendor and cruelty of creation. Howcan she endure to hear about that? An impenetrable wall standsbetween us. There is not and cannot be any relationship.Sad at heart, I retreated into myself and turned the conversation toless dangerous topics. Was she going to Sachseln, wasn't theweather lovely, and what a view, and so on. Outwardly thisencounter was completely meaningless. But, seen from within, itwas so weighty that it not only occupied my thoughts for days buthas remained forever in my memory, like a shrine by the wayside.At that time I was still in that childlike state where life consists ofsingle, unrelated experiences. For who could discover the threadsof fate which led from Brother Klaus to the pretty girl?This period of my life was filled with conflicting thoughts.Schopenhauer and Christianity would not square with one another,for one thing; and for another, No. 1 wanted to free himself from thepressure or melancholy of No. 2. It was not No. 2 who wasdepressed, but No. 1 when he remembered No. 2. It was just at thistime that, out of the clash of opposites, the first systematic fantasyof my life was born. It made its appearance piece by piece, and ithad its origin, so far as I can remember, in an experience which

stirred me profoundly.One day a 'northwest wind was lashing the Rhine into foamingwaves. My way to school led along the river. Suddenly I sawapproaching from the north a ship with a great mainsail running upthe Rhine before the storm. Here was something completely new inmy experience--a sailing vessel on the Rhine! My imagination tookwings. If, instead of this swiftly flowing river, all of Alsace were alake, we would have sailing boats and great steamers. Then Baselwould be a port; it would be almost as good as living by the sea.Then everything would be different, and we would live in anothertime and another world. There would be no Gymnasium, no longwalk to school, and I would be grown up and able to arrange my lifeas I wished. There would be a hill of rock rising out of the lake,connected by a narrow isthmus to the mainland, cut through by abroad canal with a wooden bridge over it, leading to a gate flankedby towers and opening into a little medieval city built on thesurrounding slopes. On the rock stood a well-fortified castle with atall keep, a watchtower. This was my house. In it there were no finehalls or any signs of magnificence. The rooms were simple,paneled, and rather small. There was an uncommonly attractivelibrary where you could find everything worth knowing. There wasalso a collection of weapons, and the bastions were mounted withheavy cannon. Besides that, there was a garrison of fifty men-at-arms in the castle. The little town had several hundred inhabitantsand was governed by a mayor and a town council of old men. Imyself was justice of the peace, arbitrator, and adviser, whoappeared only now and then to hold court. On the landward side thetown had a port in which lay my two masted schooner, armed withseveral small cannon.The nerve center and raison d'étre of this whole arrangement wasthe secret of the keep, which I alone knew. The thought had come tome like a shock. For, inside the tower, extending from the

battlements to the vaulted cellar, was a copper column or heavywire cable as thick as a man's arm, which ramified at the top intothe finest branches, like the crown of a tree or--better still--like ataproot with all its tiny rootlets turned upside down and reaching intothe air. From the air they drew a certain inconceivable somethingwhich was conducted down the copper column into the cellar. Here Ihad an equally inconceivable apparatus, a kind of laboratory inwhich I made gold out of the mysterious substance which thecopper roots drew from the air. This was really an arcanum, ofwhose nature I neither had nor wished to form any conception. Nordid my lmagination concern itself with the nature of thetransformation process. T actfully and with a certain nervousness itskirted around what actually went on in this laboratory. There was akind of inner prohibition: one was not supposed to look into it tooclosely, nor ask what kind of substance was extracted from the air.As Goethe says of the Mothers, "Even to speak of them dismaysthe bold.""Spirit," of course, meant for me something ineffable, but at bottom Idid not regard it as essentially different from very rarefied air. Whatthe roots absorbed and transmitted to the copper trunk was a kindof spiritual essence which became visible down in the cellar asfinished gold coins. This was certainly no mere conjuring trick, but avenerable and vitally important secret of nature which had come tome I know not how and which I had to conceal not only from thecouncil of elders but, in a sense, also from myself.My long, boring walk to and from school began to shorten mostdelightfully. Scarcely was I out of the schoolhouse than I was alreadyin the castle, where structural alterations were in progress, councilsessions were being held, evildoers sentenced, disputesarbitrated, cannon fired. The schooner's decks were cleared, thesails rigged, and the vessel steered carefully out of the harbor

before a gentle breeze, and then, as it emerged from behind therock, tacked into a stiff nor'wester. Suddenly I found myself on mydoorstep, as though only a few minutes had passed. I stepped outof my fantasy as out of a carriage which had effortlessly driven mehome. This highly enjoyable occupation lasted for several monthsbefore I got sick of it. Then I found the fantasy silly and ridiculous.Instead of daydreaming I began building castles and artfully fortifiedemplacements out of small stones, using mud as mortar--thefortress of Huningen, which at that time was still intact, serving meas a model. I studied all the available fortification plans of Vauban,and was soon familiar with all the technicalities. From Vauban Iturned to modern methods of fortification, and tried with my limitedmeans to build models of all the different types. This preoccupiedme in my leisure hours for more than two years, during which timemy leanings toward nature study and concrete things steadilyincreased, at the cost of No. 2.As long as I knew so little about real things, there was no point, Ithought, in thinking about them. Anyone could have fantasies, butreal knowledge was another matter. My parents7 Faust, Part Two, p. 76. 1allowed me to take out a subscription for a scientific periodical,which I read with passionate interest. I hunted and collected all thefossils to be found in our Jura mountains, and all the obtainableminerals, also insects and the bones of mammoths and men--mammoth bones from gravel pits in the Rhineland plain, humanbones from a mass grave near Huningen, dating from 1811. Plantsinterested me too, but not in a scientific sense. I was attracted tothem for a reason I could not understand, and with a strong feelingthat they ought not to be pulled up and dried. They were livingbeings which had meaning only so long as they were growing andflowering--a hidden, secret meaning, one of God's thoughts. They

were to be regarded with awe and contemplated with philosophicalwonderment. What the biologist had to say about them wasinteresting, but it was not the essential thing. Y et I could not explainto myself what this essential thing was. How were plants related tothe Christian religion or to the negation of the Will, for example?This was something I could not fathom. They obviously partook ofthe divine state of innocence which it was better not to disturb. Byway of contrast, insects were denatured plants--flowers and fruitswhich had presumed to crawl about on legs or stilts and to flyaround with wings like the petals of blossoms, and busiedthemselves preying on plants. Because of this unlawful activity theywere condemned to mass executions, June bugs and caterpillarsbeing the especial targets of such punitive expeditions. My"sympathy with all creatures was strictly limited to warm-bloodedanimals. The only exceptions among the cold-blooded vertebrateswere frogs and toads, because of their resemblance to humanbeings.

IIIStudent YearsIN spite of my growing scientific interests, I turned back from time totime to my philosophical books. The question of my choice of aprofession was drawing alarmingly close. I looked forward withlonging to the end of my school days. Then ' I would go to theuniversity and study--natural science, of course. Then I would knowsomething real. But no sooner had I made myself this premise thanmy doubts began. Was not my bent rather toward history andphilosophy? Then again, I was intensely interested in everythingEgyptian and Babylonian, and would have liked best to be anarchaeologist. But I had no money to study anywhere except inBasel, and in Basel there was no teacher for this subject. So thisplan very soon came to an end. For a long time I could not make upmy mind and constantly postponed the decision. My father was veryworried. He said once, "The boy is interested in everythingimaginable, but he does not know what he wants." I could only admitthat he was right. As matriculation approached and we had todecide what faculty to register for, I abruptly decided on science,but I left my schoolfellows in doubt as to whether I intended to go indefinitely for science or the humanities.This apparently sudden decision had a background of its own.Some weeks previously , just at the time when No. 1 and No. 2.were wrestling for a decision, I had two dreams. In the first dream Iwas in a dark wood that stretched along the Rhine. I came to a littlehill, a burial mound, and began to dig. After a while I turned up, tomy astonishment, some bones of prehistoric animals. This

interested me enormously , and at that moment I knew: I must get toknow nature, the world in which we live, and the things around us.Then came a second dream. Again I was in a wood; it wasthreaded with watercourses, and in the darkest place I saw acircular pool, surrounded by dense undergrowth. Half immersed inthe water lay the strangest and most wonderful creature: a roundanimal, shimmering in opalescent hues, and consisting ofinnumerable little cells, or of organs shaped like tentacles. It was agiant radiolarian, measuring about three feet across. It seemed tome indescribably wonderful that this magnificent creature should belying there undisturbed, in the hidden place, in the clear, deepwater. It aroused in me an intense desire for knowledge, so that Iawoke with a beating heart. These two dreams decided meoverwhelmingly in favor of science, and removed all my doubts.It became clear to me that I was living in a time and a place where aperson had to earn his living. T o do so, one had to be this or that,and it made a deep impression on me that all my schoolfellowswere imbued with this necessity and thought about nothing else. Ifelt I was in some way odd. Why could I not make up my mind andcommit myself to something definite? Even that plodding fellow D.who had been held up to me by my German teacher as a model ofdiligence and conscientiousness was certain that he would studytheology. I saw that I would have to settle down and think the matterthrough. If I took up zoology, for instance, I could be only aschoolmaster, or at best an employee in a zoological garden. Therewas no future in that, even if one's demands were modest--though Iwould certainly have preferred working in a zoo to the life of aschool-teacher.In this blind alley the inspiration suddenly came to me that I couldstudy medicine. Strangely enough, this had never occurred to mebefore, although my paternal grandfather, of whom I had heard so

much, had been a doctor. Indeed, for that very reason I had acertain resistance to this profession. "Only don't imitate," was mymotto. But now I told myself that the study of medicine at leastbegan with scientific subjects. T o that extent I would be doing what Iwanted. Moreover, the field of medicine was so broad that therewas always the possibility of specializing later. I had definitely optedfor science, and the only question was: How? I had to earn myliving, and as I had no money I could not attend a university abroadand obtain the kind of training that would give me hopes of ascientific career. At best I could become only a dilettante inscience. Nor, since I possessed a personality that made medisliked by many of my schoolfellows and of the people whocounted (i.e., the teachers), was there any hope of finding a patronwho would support my wish. When, therefore, I finally decided onmedicine, it was with the rather disagreeable feeling that it was nota good thing to start life with such a compromise. Nevertheless, Ifelt considerably relieved now that this irrevocable decision hadbeen made.The painful question then presented itself: Where was the money tocome from? My father could raise only part of it. He applied to theUniversity of Basel for a stipend for me, and to my shame it wasgranted. I was ashamed, not so much because our poverty was laidbare for all the world to see, but because I had secretly beenconvinced that all the "top" people, the people who "counted," wereill disposed toward me. I had never expected any such kindnessfrom them. I had obviously profited by the reputation of my father,who was a good and uncomplicated person. Yet I felt myself totallydifferent from him. I had, infact, two different conceptions of myself.Through No. 1's eyes I saw myself as a rather disagreeable andmoderately gifted young man with vaulting ambitions, anundisciplined temperament, and dubious manners, alternatingbetween naive enthusiasm and fits of childish disappointment, in

his innnermost essence a hermit and obscurantist. On the otherhand, No. 2 regarded No. 1 as a diflicult and thankless moral task,a lesson that had to be got through somehow, complicated by avariety of faults such as spells of laziness, despondency,depression, inept enthusiasm for ideas and things that nobodyvalued, liable to imaginary friendships, limited, prejudiced, stupid(mathematics!), with a lack of understanding for other people,vague and confused in philosophical matters, neither an honestChristian nor anything else. No. 2 had no definable character at all;he was a vita peracta, born, living, dead, everything in one; a totalvision of life. Though pitilessly clear about himself, he was unable toexpress himself through the dense, dark medium of No. 1, thoughhe longed to do so. When No. 2 predominated, No. 1 wascontained and obliterated in him, just as, conversely, No. 1regarded No. 2 as a region of inner darkness. No. 2 felt that anyconceivable expression of himself would be like a stone thrownover the edge of the world, dropping soundlessly into infinite night.But in him (No. 2) light reigned, as in the spacious halls of a royalpalace whose high easements open upon a landscape flooded withsunlight. Here were meaning and historical continuity, in strongcontrast to the incoherent fortuitousness of No. 1's life, which had noreal points of contact with its environment. No. 2, on the other hand,felt himself in secret accord with the Middle Ages, as personified byFaust, with the legacy of a past which had obviously stirred Goetheto the depths. For Goethe too, therefore--and this was my greatconsolation--No. 2 was a reality. Faust, as I now realized withsomething of a shock, meant more to me than my beloved Gospelaccording to St. ]ohn. There was something in Faust that workeddirectly on my feelings. John's Christ was strange to me, but stillstranger was the Savior of the other gospels. Faust, on the otherhand, was the living equivalent of No. 2, and I was convinced that hewas the answer which Goethe had given to his times. This insightwas not only comforting to, me, it also gave me an increased

feeling of inner security and a sense of belonging to the humancommunity. I was no longer isolated and a mere curiosity, a sport ofcruel nature. My godfather and authority was the great Goethehimself.About this time I had a dream which both frightened andencouraged me. It was night in some unknown place, and I wasmaking slow and painful headway against a mighty wind. Dense fogwas flying along everywhere. I had my hands cupped around a tinylight which threatened to go out at any moment. Everythingdepended on my keeping this little light alive. Suddenly I had thefeeling that something was coming up behind me. I looked back,and saw a gigantic black figure following me. But at the samemoment I was conscious, in spite of my terror, that I must keep mylittle light going through night and wind, regardless of all dangers.When I awoke I realized at once that the figure was a "specter of theBrocken," my own shadow on the swirling mists, brought into beingby the little light I was carrying. I knew, too, that this little light was myconsciousness, the only light I have. My own understanding is thesole treasure I possess, and the greatest. Though infinitely smalland fragile in comparison with the powers of darkness, it is still alight, my only light.This dream was a great illumination for me. Now I knew that No. 1was the bearer of the light, and that No. 2 followed him like ashadow. My task was to shield the light and not look back at the vitaperacta; this was evidently a forbidden realm of light of a differentsort. I must go forward against the storm, which sought to thrust meback into the immeasurable darkness of a world where one isaware of nothing except the surfaces of things in the background. Inthe role of No. 1, I had to go forward--into study, moneymaking,responsibilities, entanglements, confusions, errors, submissions,defeats. The storm pushing against me was time, ceaselesslyflowing into the past, which just as ceaselessly dogs our heels. It

exerts a mighty suction which greedily draws everything living intoitself; we can only escape from it--for a while--by .pressing forward.The past is terribly real and present, and it catches everyone whocannot save his skin with a satisfactory answer.My view of the world spun around another ninety degrees; Irecognized clearly that my path led irrevocably outward, into thelimitations and darkness of three-dimensionality. It seemed to methat Adam must once have left Paradise in this manner; Eden hadbecome a specter for him, and light was where a stony field had tobe tilled in the sweat of his brow.I asked myself: "Whence comes such a dream?" Till then I hadtaken it for granted that such dreams were sent directly by God. Butnow I had imbibed so much epistemology that doubts assailed me.One might say, for instance, that my insight had been slowlyripening for a long time and had then suddenly broken through in adream. And that, indeed, is what had happened. But thisexplanation is merely a description. The real question was why thisprocess took place and why it broke through into consciousness.Consciously I had done nothing to promote any such development;on the contrary, my sympathies were on the other side. Somethingmust therefore have been at work behind the scenes, someintelligence, at any rate something more intelligent than myself. Forthe extraordinary idea that in the light of consciousness the innerrealm of light appears as a gigantic shadow was not something Iwould have hit on of my own accord. Now all at once I understoodmany things that had been inexplicable to me before--in particularthat cold shadow of embarrassment and estrangement whichpassed over people's faces whenever I alluded to anythingreminiscent of the inner realm.I must leave No. 2 behind me, that was clear. But under nocircumstances ought I to deny him to myself or declare him invalid.

That would have been a self-mutilation, and would moreover havedeprived me of any possibility of explaining the origin of thedreams. For there was no doubt in my mind that No. 2 hadsomething to do with the creation of dreams, and I could easilycredit him with the necessary superior intelligence. But I felt myselfto be increasingly identical with No. 1, and this state proved in turnto be merely a part of the far more comprehensive No. 2, with whomfor that very reason I could no longer feel myself identical. He wasindeed a specter, a spirit who could hold his own against the worldof darkness. This was something I had not known before the dream,and even at the time--I am sure of this in retrospect--I wasconscious of it only vaguely, although I knew it emotionally beyond adoubt.At any rate, a schism had taken place between me and No. 2, withthe result that "I" was assigned to No. 1 and was separated fromNo. 2. in the same degree, who thereby acquired, as it were, anautonomous personality. I did not connect this with the idea of anydefinite individuality, such as a revenant might have, although withmy rustic origins this possibility would not have seemed strange tome. In the country people believe in these things according to thecircumstances: they are and they are not. The only distinct featureabout this spirit was his historical character, his extension in time,or rather, his timelessness. Of course I did not tell myself this in somany words, nor did I form any conception of his spatial existence.He played the role of a factor in the background of my No. 1existence, never clearly defined but yet definitely present.Children react much less to what grown-ups say than to theimponderables in the surrounding atmosphere. The childunconsciously adapts himself to them, this produces in himcorrelations of a compensatory nature. The peculiar "religious"ideas that came to me even in my earliest childhood werespontaneous products which can be understood only as reactions

to my parental enviromnent and to the spirit of the age. Thereligious doubts to which my father was later to succumb naturallyhad to pass through a long period of incubation. Such a revolutionof one's world, and of the world in general, threw its shadowsahead, and the shadows were all the longer, the more desperatelymy father's conscious mind resisted their power. It is not surprisingthat my father's forebodings put him in a state of unrest, which thencommunicated itself to me.I never had the impression that these influences emanated from mymother, for she was somehow rooted in deep, invisible ground,though it never appeared to me as confidence in her Christian faith.For me it was somehow connected with animals, trees, mountains,meadows, and running water, all of which contrasted most strangelywith her Christian surface and her conventional assertions of faith.This background corresponded so well to my own attitude that itcaused me no uneasiness; on the contrary, it gave me a sense ofsecurity and the conviction that here was solid ground on which onecould stand. It never occurred to me how "pagan" this foundationwas. My mother's "No. 2" offered me the strongest support in theconflict then beginning between paternal tradition and the strange,compensatory products which my unconscious had been stimulatedto create.Looking back, I now see how very much my development as a childanticipated future events and paved the way for modes ofadaptation to my father's religious collapse as well as to theshattering revelation of the world as we see it today--a revelationwhich had not taken shape from one day to the next, but had cast itsshadows long in advance. Although we human beings have our ownpersonal life, we are yet in large measure the representatives, thevictims and promoters of a collective spirit whose years arecounted in centuries. We can well think all our lives long that we arefollowing our own noses, and may never discover that we are, for

the most part, supernumeraries on the stage of the world theater.There are factors which, although we do not know them,nevertheless influence our lives, the more so if they areunconscious. Thus at least a part of our being lives in the centuries--that part which, for my private use, I have designated "No. 2." That itis not an individual curiosity is proved by the religion of the West,which expressly applies itself to this inner man and for two thousandyears has earnestly tried to bring him to the knowledge of oursurface consciousness with its personalistic preoccupations: "Nonforas ire, in interiore homine habitat veritas" (Go not outside; truthdwells in the inner man).During the years 1892-94 I had a number of rather vehementdiscussions with my father. He had studied Oriental languages inGottingen and had done his dissertation on the Arabic version ofthe Song of Songs. His days of glory had ended with his finalexamination. Thereafter he forgot his linguistic talent. As a countryparson he lapsed into a sort of sentimental idealism and intoreminiscences of his golden student days, continued to smoke along student's pipe, and discovered that his marriage was not all hehad imagined it to be. He did a great deal of good--far too much--and as a result was usually irritable. Both parents made greatefforts to live devout lives, with the result that there were angryscenes between them only too frequently. These dlfficulties,understandably enough, later shattered my father's faith.At that time his irritability and discontent had increased, and hiscondition filled me with concern. My mother avoided everything thatmight excite him and refused to engage in disputes. Though Irealized that this was the wisest course to take, often I could notkeep my own temper in check. I would remain passive during hisoutbursts of rage, but when he seemed to be in a more accessiblemood I sometimes tried to strike up a conversation with him, hoping

to learn something about his inner thoughts and his understandingof himself. It was clear to me that something quite specific wastormenting him, and I suspected that it had to do with his faith. Froma number of hints he let fall I was convinced that he suffered fromreligious doubts. This, it seemed to me, was bound to be the case ifthe necessary experience had not come to him. From my attemptsat discussion I learned in fact that something of the sort was amiss,for all my questions were met with the same old lifeless theologicalanswers, or with a resigned shrug which aroused the spirit ofcontradiction in me. I could not understand why he did not seize onthese opportunities pugnaciously and come to terms with hissituation. I saw that my critical questions made him sad, but Inevertheless hoped for a constructive talk, since it appeared almostinconceivable to me that he should not have had experience ofGod, the most evident of all experiences. I knew enough aboutepistemology to realize that knowledge of this sort could not beproved, but it was equally clear to me that it stood in no more needof proof than the beauty of a sunset or the terrors of the night. I tried,no doubt very clumsily, to convey these obvious truths to him, withthe hopeful intention of helping him to bear the fate which hadinevitably befallen him. He had to quarrel with somebody , so he didit with his family and himself. Why didn't he do it with God, the darkauthor of all created things, who alone was responsible for thesufferings of the world? God would assuredly have sent him by wayof an answer one of those magical, infinitely profound dreams whichHe had sent to me even without being asked, and which had sealedmy fate. I did not know why, it simply was so. Y es, He had evenallowed me a glimpse into His own being. This was a great secretwhich I dared not and could not reveal to my father. I might havebeen able to reveal it had he been capable of understanding thedirect experience of God. But in my talks with him I never got thatfar, never even came within sight of the problem, because I alwaysset about it in a very unpsychological and intellectual way, and did

everything possible to avoid the emotional aspects. Each time thisapproach was like a red rag to a bull and led to irritable reactionswhich were incomprehensible to me. I was unable to understandhow a perfectly rational argument could meet with such emotionalresistance.These fruitless discussions exasperated my father and me, and inthe end we abandoned them, each burdened with his own specificfeeling of inferiority. Theology had alienated my father and me fromone another. I felt that I had once again suffered a fatal defeat,though I sensed I was not alone. I had a dim premonition that hewas inescapably succumbing to his fate. He was lonely and had nofriend to talk with. At least I knew no one among our acquaintanceswhom I would have trusted to say the saving word. Once I heard himpraying. He struggled desperately to keep his faith. I was shakenand outraged at once, because I saw how hopelessly he wasentrapped by the Church and its theological thinking. They hadblocked all avenues by which he might have reached God directly,and then faithlessly abandoned him. Now I understood the deepestmeaning of my earlier experience: God Himself had disavowedtheology and the Church founded upon it. On the other hand Godcondoned this theology, as He condoned so much else. It seemedridiculous to me to suppose that men were responsible for suchdevelopments. What were men, anyway? "They are born dumb andblind as puppies," I thought, "and like all God's creatures arefurnished with the dimmest light, never enough to illuminate thedarkness in which they grope." I was equally sure that none of thetheologians I knew had ever seen "the light that shineth in thedarkness" with his own eyes, for if they had they would not havebeen able to teach a "theologicaI religion," which seemed quiteinadequate to me, since there was nothing to do with it but believe itwithout hope. This was what my father had tried valiantly to do, andhad run aground. He could not even defend himself against the

ridiculous materialism of the psychiatrists. This, too, was somethingthat one had to believe, just like theology, only in the oppositesense. I felt more certain than ever that both of them lackedepistemological criticism as well as experience.My father was obviously under the impression that psychiatrists haddiscovered something in the brain which proved that in the placewhere mind should have been there was only matter, and nothing"spiritual." This was borne out by his admonitions that if I studiedmedicine I should in Heaven's name not become a materialist. T ome this warning meant that I ought to believe nothing at all, for Iknew that materialists believed in their definitions just as thetheologians did in theirs, and that my poor father had simply jumpedout of the frying pan into the fire. I recognized that this celebratedfaith of his had played this deadly trick on him, and not only on himbut on most of the cultivated and serious people I knew. The archsin of faith, it seemed to me, was that it forestalled experience. Howdid the theologians know that God had deliberately arrangedcertain things and "permitted" certain others, and how did thepsychiatrists know that matter was endowed with the qualities of thehuman mind? I was in no danger of succumbing to materialism, butmy father certainly was. Apparently someone had whisperedsomething about "suggestion," for I discovered that he was readingBernheim's book on suggestion in Sigmund Freud's translation.[1]This was a new and significant departure, for I had never beforeseen my father reading anything but novels or an occasional travelbook. All "clever" and interesting books were taboo. But hispsychiatric reading made him no happier. His depressive moodsincreased in frequency and intensity , and so did his hypochondria.For a number of years he had complained of all sorts of abdominalsymptoms, though his doctor had been unable to find anythingdefinite wrong with him. Now he complained of the sensation ofhaving "stones in

1 Die Suggestion und ihre Heilwirkung (Leipzig and Vienna, 1888).the abdomen." For a long time we did not take this seriously, but atlast the doctor became suspicious. This was toward the end of thesummer of 1895.In the spring of that year I had begun my studies at the University ofBasel. The only time in my life that I have ever been bored--myschool days at the Gymnasium was over at last and the goldengates to the universitas litterarum and to academic freedom wereopening wide for me. Now I would hear the truth about nature, atleast its most essential aspects. I would learn all there was to knowabout the anatomy and physiology of man, and would acquireknowledge of the diseases. In addition to all this, I was admittedinto a color-wearing fraternity to which my father had belonged.Early in my freshman year he came along on a fraternity outing to awine-growing village in the Markgrafen country and there delivereda whimsical speech in which, to my delight, the gay spirit of his ownstudent days came back again. I realized in a flash that his life hadcome to a standstill at his graduation, and the verse of a studentsong echoed in my ears:Sie zogen mit gesenktem. BlickIn das Philisterland zuruck.O jerum, jerum, jerum,O quae mutatio rerum! "[2]The words fell heavily on my soul. Once upon a time he too hadbeen an enthusiastic student in his first year, as I was now; theworld had opened out for him, as it was doing for me; the infinitetreasures of knowledge had spread before him, as now before me.How can it have happened that everything was blighted for him, hadturned to sourness and bitterness? I found no answer, or too many.The speech he delivered that summer evening over the wine wasthe last chance he had to live out his memories of the time when he

was what he should have been. Soon afterward his conditiondeteriorated. In the late autumn of 1895 he became bedridden, andearly in 1896 he died.2 "With downcast eyes they marched back to the land of the Philistines. Odear, O dear, O dear, how things have changedI"I had come home after lectures, and asked how he was. "Oh, stillthe same. He's very weak," my mother said. He whisperedsomething to her, which she repeated to me, warning me with hereyes of his delirious condition: "He wants to know whether you havepassed the state examination? I saw that I must lie. "Y es, it wentvery weIl." He sighed with relief, and closed his eyes. A little later Iwent in to see him again. He was alone; my mother was doingsomething in the adjoining room. There was a rattling in his throat,and I could see that he was in the death agony. I stood by his bed,fascinated. I had never seen anyone die before. Suddenly hestopped breathing. I waited and waited for the next breath. It did notcome. Then I remembered my mother and went into the next room,where she sat by the window, knitting. "He is dying," I said. Shecame with me to the bed, and saw that he was dead. She said as ifin wonderment: "How quickly it has all passed."The following days were gloomy and painful, and little of them hasremained in my memory. Once my mother spoke to me or to thesurrounding air in her "second" voice, and remarked, "He died intime for you." Which appeared to mean: "Y ou did not understandeach other and he might have become a hindrance to you." Thisview seemed to me to fit in with my mother's No. 2 personality.The words "for you" hit me terribly hard, and I felt that a bit of the olddays had now come irrevocably to an end. At the same time, a bitof manliness and freedom awoke in me. After my father's death Imoved into his room, and took his place inside the family. For

instance, I had to hand out the housekeeping money to my motherevery week, because she was unable to economize and could notmanage money.Six weeks after his death my father appeared to me in a dream.Suddenly he stood before me and said that he was coming backfrom his holiday. He had made a good recovery and was nowcoming home. I thought he would be annoyed with me for havingmoved into his room. But not a bit of it! Nevertheless, I felt ashamedbecause I had imagined he was dead. Two days later the dreamwas repeated. My father had recovered and was coming home, andagain I reproached myself because I had thought he was dead.Later I kept asking myself: "What does it mean that my fatherreturns in dreams and that he seems so real?" It was anunforgettable experience, and it forced me for the first time to thinkabout life after death. With the death of my father difficult problemsarose concerning the continuation of my studies. Some of mymother's relations took the view that I ought to look for a clerk's jobin a business house, so as to earn money as quickly as possible.My mother's youngest brother offered to help her, since herresources were not nearly sufficient to live on. An uncle on myfather's side helped me. At the end of my studies I owed him threethousand francs. The rest I earned by working as a junior assistantand by helping an aged aunt dispose of her small collection ofantiques. I sold them piece by piece at good prices, and received avery welcome percentage.I would not have missed this time of poverty. One learns to valuesimple things. I still remember the time when I was given a box ofcigars as a present. It seemed to me princely. They lasted a wholeyear, for I allowed myself one only on Sundays. My student dayswere a good time for me. Everything was intellectually alive, and itwas also a time of friendships. In the fraternity meetings I gaveseveral lectures on theological and psychological subjects. We had

many animated discussions, and not always about medicalquestions only. We argued over Schopenhauer and Kant, we knewall about the stylistic niceties of Cicero, and were interested intheology and philosophy.During my student days I received much stimulation in regard toreligious questions. At home I had the welcome opportunity to talkwith a theologian who had been my father's vicar. He wasdistinguished not only by his phenomenal appetite, which put minequite in the shade, but by his remarkable erudition. From him Ilearned a great deal about the Church Fathers and the history ofdogma. He also introduced me to new aspects of Protestanttheology. Ritschl's theology was much in fashion in those days. Itshistoricism irritated me, especially the comparison with a railwaytrain. The theological students with whom I had discussions in thefraternity all seemed quite3 Albrecht Ritschl (1822-89) compared Christ's coming to the shunting of arailroad train. The engine gives a push from behind, the motion passesthrough the entire train, and the foremost car begins to mov e. Thus theimpulse given by Christ is transmitted down the centuries.--A. J.content with the theory of the historical effect produced by Christ'slife. This view seemed to me not only soft-witted but altogetherlifeless. Neither could I subscribe to the tendency to move Christinto the foreground and make him the sole decisive figure in thedrama of God and man. T o me this absolutely belied Christ's ownview that the Holy Ghost, who had begotten him, would take hisplace among men after his death.For me the Holy Ghost was a manifestation of the inconceivableGod. The workings of the Holy Ghost were not only sublime but alsopartook of that strange and even questionable quality whichcharacterized the deeds of Y ahweh, whom I naively identified with

the Christian image of God, as I had been taught in my instructionfor confirmation. (I was also not aware at this time that the devil,properly speaking, had been born with Christianity.) Lord Jesuswas to me unquestionably a man and therefore a fallible figure, orelse a mere mouthpiece of the Holy Ghost. This highly unorthodoxview, a far cry from the theological one, naturally ran up against utterincomprehension. The disappointment I felt about this gradually ledme to a kind of resigned indifference, and confirmed my convictionthat in religious matters only experience counted.During my first years at the university I made the discovery thatwhile science opened the door to enormous quantities ofknowledge, it provided genuine insights very sparingly, and these inthe main were of a specialized nature. I knew from my philosophicalreading that the existence of the psyche was responsible for thissituation. Without the psyche there would be neither knowledge norinsight. Y et nothing was ever said about the psyche. Everywhere itwas tacitly taken for granted, and even when someone mentionedit--as did C. G. Carus, for example--there was no real knowledge ofit but only philosophical speculation which might just as easily takeone turn as another. I could make neither head nor tail of thiscurious observation.At the end of my second semester, however, I made anotherdiscovery, which was to have great consequences. In the library of acIassmate's father I came upon a small book on spiritualisticphenomena, dating from the seventies. It was an account ofbeginnings of spiritualism, and was written by a theologian. Myinitial doubts were quickly dissipated, for I could not help seeingthat the phenomena described in the book were in principle muchthe same as the stories I had heard again and again in the countrysince my earliest childhood. The material, without a doubt, wasauthentic. But the great question of whether these stories werephysically true was not answered to my satisfaction. Nevertheless, it

could be established that at all times and all over the world thesame stories had been reported again and again. There must besome reason for this, and it could not possibly have been thepredominance of the same religious conceptions everywhere, forthat was obviously not the case. Rather it must be connected withthe objective behavior of the human psyche. But with regard to thiscardinal question--the objective nature of the psyche--I could findout absolutely nothing, except what the philosophers said.The observations of the spiritualists, weird and questionable asthey seemed to me, were the first accounts I had seen of objectivepsychic phenomena. Names like Zoellner and Crookes impressedthemselves on me, and I read virtually the whole of the literatureavailable to me at the time. Naturally I also spoke of these mattersto my comrades, who to my great astonishment reacted withderision and disbelief or with anxious defensiveness. I wondered atthe sureness with which they could assert that things like ghosts andtable-turning were impossible and therefore fraudulent, and on theother hand at the evidently anxious nature of their defensiveness. I,too, was not certain of the absolute reliability of the reports, but why,after all, should there not be ghosts? How did we know thatsomething was "impossible"? And, above all, what did the anxietysignify? For myself I found such possibilities extremely interestingand attractive. They added another dimension to my life; the worldgained depth and background. Could, for example, dreams haveanything to do with ghosts? Kant's Dreams of a Spirit Seer camejust at the right moment, and soon I also discovered Karl Duprel,who had evaluated these ideas philosophically and psychologically.I dug up Eschenmayer, Passavant, Justinus Kerner, and Gorres,and read seven volumes of Swedenborg.My mother's No. 2 sympathized wholeheartedly with my enthusiasm,but everyone else I knew was distinctly discouraging. Hitherto I had

encountered only the brick wall of traditional views, but now I cameup against the steel of people's prejudice and their utter incapacityto admit unconventional possibilities. I found this even with myclosest friends. T o them all this was far worse than mypreoccupation with theology. I had the feeling that I had pushed tothe brink of the world; what was of burning interest to me was nulland void for others, I and even a cause for dread.Dread of what? I could find no explanation for this. After all, therewas nothing preposterous or world-shaking in the idea that theremight be events which overstepped the limited categories of space,time, and causality. Animals were known to sense beforehandstorms and earthquakes. There were dreams which foresaw thedeath of certain persons, clocks which stopped at the moment ofdeath, glasses which shattered at the critical moment. All thesethings had been taken for granted in the world of my childhood. Andnow I was apparently the only person who had ever heard of them.In all earnestness I asked myself what kind of world I had stumbledinto. Plainly the urban world knew nothing about the country world,the real world of mountains, woods, and rivers, of animals and"God's thoughts" (plants and crystals). I found this explanationcomforting. At all events, it bolstered my self-esteem, for I realizedthat for all its wealth of learning the urban world was mentally ratherlimited. This insight proved dangerous, because it tricked me intofits of superiority, misplaced criticism, and aggressiveness, whichgot me deservedly disliked. This eventually brought back all the olddoubts, inferiority feelings, and depressions--a vicious circle I wasresolved to break at all costs. No longer would I stand outside theworld, enjoying the dubious reputation of a freak.After my first introductory course I became junior assistant inanatomy, and the following semester the demonstrator placed mein charge of the course in histology--to my intense satisfaction,naturally. I interested myself primarily in evolutionary theory and

comparative anatomy, and I also became acquainted with neo-vitalistic doctrines. What fascinated me most of all was themorphological point of view in the broadest sense. With physiologyit was just the opposite. I found the subject thoroughly repellentbecause of vivisection, which was practiced merely for purposes ofdemonstration. I could never free myself from the feeling that warm-blooded creatures were akin to us and not just cerebral automata.Consequently I cut demonstration classes whenever I could. Irealized that one had to experiment on animals, but thedemonstration of such experiments nevertheless seemed to mehorrible, barbarous, and above all unnecessary. I had imaginationenough to picture the demonstrated procedures from a meredescription of them. My compassion for animals did not derive fromthe Buddhistic trimmings of Schopenhauer's philosophy, but restedon the deeper foundation of a primitive attitude of mind--on anunconscious identity with animals. At the time, of course, I waswholly ignorant of this important psychological fact. My repugnancefor physiology was so great that my examination results in thissubject were correspondingly poor. Nevertheless, I scrapedthrough.The clinical semesters that followed kept me so busy that scarcelyany time remained for my forays into outlying fields. I was able tostudy Kant only on Sundays. I also read Eduard von Hartmannassiduously. Nietzsche had been on my program for some time, butI hesitated to begin reading him because I felt I was insufficientlyprepared. At that time he was much discussed, mostly in adverseterms, by the allegedly competent philosophy students, from which Iwas able to deduce the hostility he aroused in the higher echelons.The supreme authority, of course, was Jakob Burckhardt, whosevarious critical comments on Nietzsche were bandied about.Moreover, there were some persons at the university who hadknown Nietzsche personally and were able to retail all sorts of

unflattering tidbits about him. Most of them had not read a word ofNietzsche and therefore dwelt at length on his outward foibles, forexample, his putting on airs as a gentleman, his manner of playingthe piano, his stylistic exaggerations--idiosyncrasies which got onthe nerves of the good people of Basel in those days. Such thingswould certainly not have caused me to postpone the reading ofNietzsche--on the contrary, they acted as the strongest incentive.But I was held back by a secret fear that I might perhaps be likehim, at least in regard to the "secret" which had isolated him fromhis environment. Perhaps--who knows?--he had had innerexperiences, insights which he had unfortunately attempted to talkabout, and had found that no one understood him. Obviously hewas, or at least was considered to be, an eccentric, a sport ofnature, which I did not want to be under any circumstances. I fearedI might be forced to recognize that I too was another such strangebird. Of course, he was a professor, had written whole long booksand so had attained unimaginable heights, but, like me, he was aclergyman's son. He, however, had been born in the great land ofGermany, which reached as far as the sea, while I was only a Swissand sprang from a modest parsonage in a small border village. Hespoke a polished High German, knew Latin and Greek, possiblyFrench, Italian, and Spanish as well, whereas the only language Icommanded with any certainty was the Waggis-Basel dialect. He,possessed of all these splendors, could well afford to be somethingof an eccentric, but I must not let myself find out how far I might belike him.In spite of these trepidations I was curious, and finally resolved toread him. Thoughts Out of Season was the first volume that fell intomy hands. I was carried away by enthusiasm, and soon afterwardread Thus Spake Zarathustra. This, like Goethe's Faust, was atremendous experience for me. Zarathustra was Nietzsche's Faust,his No. 2, and my No. 2 now corresponded to Zarathustra--though

this was rather like comparing a molehill with Mount Blanc. AndZarathustra--there could be no doubt about that--was morbid. Wasmy No. 2 also morbid? This possibility filled me with a terror whichfor a long time I refused to admit, but the idea cropped up againand again at inopportune moments, throwing me into a cold sweat,so that in the end I was forced to reflect on myself. Nietzsche haddiscovered his No. 2 only late in life, when he was already pastmiddle age, whereas I had known mine ever since boyhood.Nietzsche had spoken naively and incautiously about this arrheton,this thing not to be named, as though it were quite in order. But Ihad noticed in time that this only leads to trouble. He was so brilliantthat he was able to come to Basel as a professor when still a youngman, not suspecting what lay ahead of him. Because of his verybrilliance he should have noticed in time that something was amiss.That, I thought, was his morbid misunderstanding: that he fearlesslyand unsuspectingly let his No. 2 loose upon a world that knew andunderstood nothing about such things. He was moved by thechildish hope of finding people who would be able to share hisecstasies and could grasp his "transvaluation of all values." But hefound only educated Philistines--tragi-comically, he was onehimself. Like the rest of them, he did not understand himself whenhe fell head first into the unutterable mystery and wanted to sing itspraises to the dull, godforsaken masses. That was the reason forthe bombastic language, the piling up of metaphors, the hymnlikeraptures--all a vain attempt to catch the ear of a world which hadsold its soul for a mass of disconnected facts.--And he fell--tightrope-walker that he proclaimed himself to be--into depths farbeyond himself. He did not know his way about in this world andwas like a man possessed, one who could be handled only with theutmost caution. Among my friends and acquaintances I knew of onlytwo who openly declared themselves adherents of Nietzsche. Bothwere homosexual; one of them ended by committing suicide, theother ran to seed as a misunderstood genius. The rest of my friends

were not so much dumfounded by the phenomenon of Zarathustraas simply immune to its appeal.Just as Faust had opened a door for me, Zarathustra slammed oneshut, and it remained shut for a long time to come. I felt like the oldpeasant who discovered that two of his cows had evidently beenbewitched and had got their heads in the same halter. "How did thathappen?" asked his small son. "Boy, one doesn't talk about suchthings," replied his father.I realized that one gets nowhere unless one talks to people aboutthe things they know. The naive person does not appreciate whatan insult it is to talk to one's fellows about anything that is unknownto them. They pardon such ruthless behavior only in a writer,journalist, or poet. I came to see that a new idea, or even just anunusual aspect of an old one, can be communicated only by facts.Facts remain and cannot be brushed aside; sooner or latersomeone will come upon them and know what he has found. Irealized that I talked only for want of something better, that I ought tobe offering facts, and these I lacked entirely. I had nothing concretein my hands. More than ever I found myself driven towardempiricism. I began to blame the philosophers for rattling awaywhen experience was lacking, and holding their tongues when theyought to have been answering with facts. In this respect they allseemed like watered-down theologians. I felt that at some time orother I had passed through the valley of diamonds, but I couldconvince no one--not even myself, when I looked at them moreclosely--that the specimens I had brought back were not merepieces of gravel.This was in 1898, when I began to think more seriously about mycareer as a medical man. I soon came to the conclusion that I wouldhave to specialize. The choice seemed to lie between surgery andinternal medicine. I inclined toward the former because of my

special training in anatomy and my preference for pathology, andwould very probably have made surgery my profession if I hadpossessed the necessary financial means. All along, it had beenextremely painful to me to have to go into debt in order to study atall. I knew that after the final examination I would have to beginearning my living as soon as possible. I imagined a career asassistant at some cantonal hospital, where there was more hope ofobtaining a paid position than in a clinic. Moreover, a post in aclinic depended to a large extent on the backing or personalinterest of the chief. With my questionable popularity andestrangement from others--experienced all too often--I dared notthink of any such stroke of luck, and therefore contented myself withthe modest prospect of a post in one of the local hospitals. The restdepended on hard work and on my capability and application.During the summer holidays, however, something happened thatwas destined to influence me profoundly. One day I was sitting inmy room, studying my textbooks. In the adjoining room, the door towhich stood ajar, my mother was knitting. That was our dining room,where the round walnut dining table stood. The table had come fromthe dowry of my paternal grandmother, and was at this time aboutseventy years old. My mother was sitting by the window, about ayard away from the table. My sister was at school and our maid inthe kitchen. Suddenly there sounded a report like a pistol shot. Ijumped up and rushed into the room from which the noise of theexplosion had come. My mother was sitting flabbergasted in herarmchair, the knitting fallen from her hands. She stammered out,"W-w-what's happened? It was right beside mel" and stared at thetable. Following her eyes, I saw what had happened. The table tophad split from the rim to beyond the center, and not along any joint;the split ran right through the solid wood. I was thunderstruck. Howcould such a thing happen? A table of solid walnut that had driedout for seventy years--how could it split on a summer day in the

relatively high degree of humidity characteristic of our climate? If ithad stood next to a heated stove on a cold, dry winter day, then itmight have been conceivable.What in the world could have caused such an explosion? "Therecertainly are curious accidents," I thought. My mother noddeddarkly. "Y es, yes," she said in her No. 2 voice, "that meanssomething." Against my will I was impressed and annoyed withmyself for not finding anything to say.Some two weeks later I came home at six o'clock in the eveningand found the household--my mother, my fourteen-year--old sister,and the maid--in a great state of agitation. About an hour earlierthere had been another deafening report. This time it was not thealready damaged table; the noise had come from the direction ofthe sideboard, a heavy piece of furniture dating from the earlynineteenth century. They had already looked all over it, but hadfound no trace of a split. I immediately began examining thesideboard and the entire surrounding area, but just as fruitlessly.Then I began on the interior of the sideboard. In the cupboardcontaining the bread basket I found a loaf of bread, and, beside it,the bread knife. The greater part of the blade had snapped off inseveral pieces. The handle lay in one corner of the rectangularbasket, and in each of the other corners lay a piece of the blade.The knife had been used shortly before, at four-o'clock tea, andafterward put away. Since then no one had gone to the sideboard.The next day I took the shattered knife to one of the best cutlers inthe town. He examined the fractures with a magni-- fying glass, andshook his head. "This knife is perfectly sound," he said. "There isno fault in the steel. Someone must have deliberately broken itpiece by piece. It could be done, for instance, by sticking the bladeinto the crack of the drawer and - breaking off a piece at a time. Orelse it might have been dropped on stone from a great height. But

good steel can't explode. Someone has been pulling your leg." Ihave carefully kept the pieces of the knife to this day. My motherand my sister had been in the room when the sudden report madethem jump.My mother's No. 2 looked at me meaningfully, but I could findnothing to say. I was completely at a loss and could offer noexplanation of what had happened, and this was all the moreannoying as I had to admit that I was profoundly impressed. Whyand how had the table split and the knife shattered? The hypothesisthat it was just a coincidence went much too far. It seemed highlyimprobable to me that the Rhine would flow backward just once, bymere chance--and all other possible explanations wereautomatically ruled out. So what was it?A few weeks later I heard of certain relatives who had beenengaged for some time in table-turning, and also had a medium, ayoung girl of fifteen and a half. The group had been thinking ofhaving me meet the medium, who produced somnambulistic statesand spiritualistic phenomena. When I heard this, I immediatelythought of the strange manifestations in our house, and Iconjectured that they might be somehow connected with thismedium. I therefore began attending the regular séances which myrelatives held every Saturday evening. We had results in the form ofcommunications and tapping noises from the walls and the table.Movements of the table independently of the medium werequestionable, and I soon found out that limiting conditions imposedon the experiment generally had an obstructive effect. I thereforeaccepted the obvious autonomy of the tapping noises and turnedmy attention to the content of the communications. I set forth theresults of these observations in my doctoral thesis. After about twoyears of experimentation we all became rather weary of it. I caughtthe medium trying to produce phenomena by trickery, and thismade me break off the experiments--very much to my regret, for I

had learned from this example how a No. 2 personality is formed,how it enters into a child's consciousness and finally integrates itinto itself. She was one of these precociously maturedpersonalities, and she died of tuberculosis at the age of twenty-six. Isaw her once again, when she was twenty-four, and received alasting impression of the independence and maturity of herpersonality. After her death I learned from her family that during thelast months of her life her character disintegrated bit by bit, and thatultimately she returned to the state of a two-year-old child, in whichcondition she fell into her last sleep.All in all, this was the one great experience which wiped out all myearlier philosophy and made it possible for me to achieve apsychological point of view. I had discovered some objective factsabout the human psyche. Y et the nature of the experience was suchthat once again I was unable to speak of it. I knew no one to whom Icould have told the whole story. Once more I had to lay aside anunfinished problem. It was not until two years later that mydissertation appeared.[4]At the medical clinic Friedrich von Muller had taken the place of oldImmermann. In Muller I encountered a mind that appealed to me. Isaw how a keen intelligence grasped the problem and formulatedquestions which in themselves were half the solution. He, for hispart, seemed to see something in me, for toward the end of mystudies he proposed that I should go with him, as his assistant, toMunich, where he had received an appointment. This invitationalmost persuaded me to devote myself to internal medicine. I mighthave done so had not something happened in the meantime whichremoved all my doubts Concerning my future career.4 Zur Psychologie und Pathologie sogenannter occulter Phanomene: einepsychietrische Studie (1902); English trans.: "On the Psychology andPathology of So-called Occult Phenomena," in Psychiatric Studies (CW 1).

Though I had attended psychiatric lectures and clinics, the currentinstructor in psychiatry was not exactly stimulating, and when Irecalled the effects which the experience of asylums had had on myfather, this was not calculated to prepossess me in favor ofpsychiatry. In preparing myself for the state examination, therefore,the textbook on psychiatry was the last I attacked. I expectednothing of it, and I still remember that as I opened the book byKrafft-Ebing[5] the thought came to me: '"Well, now let's see what apsychiatrist has to say for himself." The lectures and clinicaldemonstrations had not made the slightest impression on me. Icould not remember a single one of the cases I had seen in theclinic, but only my boredom and disgust.I began with the preface, intending to find out how a psychiatristintroduced his subject or, indeed, justified his reason for existing atall. By way of excuse for this high and mighty attitude I must make itclear that in the medical world at that time psychiatry was quitegenerally held in contempt. No one really knew anything about it,and there was no psychology which regarded man as a whole andincluded his pathological variations in the total picture. The directorwas locked up in the same institution with his patients, and theinstitution was equally cut off, isolated on the outskirts of the city likean ancient lazaret with its lepers. No one liked looking in thatdirection. The doctors knew almost as little as the layman andtherefore shared his feelings. Mental disease was a hopeless andfatal affair which cast its shadow over psychiatry as well. Thepsychiatrist was a strange figure in those days, as I was soon tolearn from personal experience.Beginning with the preface, I read; "It is probably due to thepeculiarity of the subject and its incomplete state of developmentthat psychiatric textbooks are stamped with a more or lesssubjective character." A few lines further on, the author called the

psychoses "diseases of the personality? My heart suddenly beganto pound. I had to stand up and draw a deep breath. My excitementwas intense, for it had become clear to me, in a flash of illumination,that for me the only possible goal5 Lehrbuch der Psychiatrie, 4th edn. (1890).was psychiatry. Here alone the two currents of my interest couldflow together and in a united stream dig their own bed. Here wasthe empirical field common to biological and spiritual facts, which Ihad everywhere sought and nowhere found. Here at last was theplace where the collision of nature and spirit became a reality.My violent reaction set in when Krafft--Ebing spoke of the"subjective character" of psychiatric textbooks. So, I thought, thetextbook is in part the subjective confession of the author. With hisspecific prejudice, with the totality of his being, he stands behindthe objectivity of his experiences and responds to the "disease ofthe personality" with the whole of his own personality. Never had Iheard anything of this sort from my teacher at the clinic. In spite ofthe fact that Krafft--Ebing's textbook did not differ essentially fromother books of the kind, these few hints cast such a transfiguringlight on psychiatry that I was irretrievably drawn under its spell.The decision was taken. When I informed my teacher in internalmedicine of my intention, I could read in his face his amazementand disappointment. My old wound, the feeling of being an outsiderand of alienating others, began to ache again. But now I understoodwhy. No one, not even I myself, had ever imagined I could becomeinterested in this obscure bypath. My friends were astounded andput out, thinking me a fool for throwing up the enviable chance of asensible career in internal medicine, which dangled so temptinglybefore my nose, in favor of this psychiatric nonsense.

I saw that once again I had obviously got myself into a side alleywhere no one could or would follow me. But I knew--and nothing andnobody could have deflected me from my purpose--that mydecision stood, and that it was fate. It was as though two rivers hadunited and in one grand torrent were bearing me inexorably towarddistant goals. This confident feeling that I was a "united doublenature" carried me as if on a magical wave through theexamination, in which I came out at the top. Characteristically, thestumbling block that lurks in the path of all miracles that turn out toowell tripped me up in the very subject in which I really excelled,pathological anatomy. By a ridiculous error, in a slide which apartfrom all sorts of debris seemed to contain only epithelial cells, Ioverlooked some molds hiding in a corner. In the other subjects, Ihad even guessed what questions I would be asked. Thanks to this,I cleared several dangerous reefs with flying colors. In revenge, Iwas then fooled in the most grotesque way just where I felt mostcertain of myself. Had it not been for this I would have had thehighest mark in the examination.As it was, another candidate received the same number of pointsas I did. He was a lone wolf, with a personality quite opaque to meand suspiciously banal. It was impossible to talk to him aboutanything except "shop." He reacted to everything with an enigmaticsmile, which reminded me of the Greek statues at Aegina. He hadan air of superiority, and yet underneath it he seemed embarrassedand never quite fitted into any situation. Or was it a kind ofstupidity? I could never make him out. The only definite thing abouthim was the impression he gave of almost monomaniacal ambitionwhich precluded interest in anything but sheer facts. A few yearsafterward he became schizophrenic. I mention this as acharacteristic example of the parallelism of events. My first bookwas on the psychology of dementia praecox (schizophrenia), and init my personality with its bias or "personal equation" responded to

this "disease of the personality? I maintained that psychiatry, in thebroadest sense, is a dialogue between the sick psyche and thepsyche of the doctor, which is presumed to be "normal." It is acoming to terms between the sick personality and that of thetherapist, both in principle equally subjective. My aim was to showthat delusions and hallucinations were not just specific symptoms ofmental disease but also had a human meaning.The evening after my last examination I treated myself--for the firsttime in my life--to the longed-for luxury of going to the theater. Untilthen my finances had not permitted any such extravagance. But Istill had some money left from the sale of the antiques, and thisallowed me not only a visit to the opera but even a trip to Munichand Stuttgart.Bizet intoxicated and overwhelmed me, rocked me on the a wavesof an infinite sea. And next day, when the train carried me over theborder into a wider world, the melodies of Carmen accompaniedme. In Munich I saw real classical art for the first time, and this inconjunction with Bizet's music put me in a springlike, nuptial mood,whose depth and meaning I could only dimly grasp. Outwardly,however, it was a dismal week between the first and the ninth ofDecember, 1900.In Stuttgart I paid a farewell visit to my aunt, Frau Reimer-Jung,whose husband was a psychiatrist. She was the daughter of mypaternal grandfather's first marriage to Virginia de Lassaulx. Shewas an enchanting old lady with sparkling blue eyes and a vivacioustemperament. She seemed to me immersed in a world ofimpalpable fantasies and of memories that refused to go home--thelast breath of a vanishing, irrevocable past. This visit was a finalfarewell to the nostalgias of my childhood.On December 10, 1900, I took up my post as assistant at Burgholzli

Mental Hospital, Zurich. I was glad to be in Zurich, for in the courseof the years Basel had become too stuffy for me. For the Baslers notown exists but their own: only Basel is "civilized," and north of theriver Birs the land of the barbarians begins. My friends could notunderstand my going away, and reckoned I would be back in notime. But that was out of the question, for in Basel I was stamped forall time as the son of the Reverend Paul Jung and the grandson ofProfessor Carl Gustav Jung. I was an intellectual and belonged to adefinite social set. I felt resistances against this, for I could not andwould not let myself be classified. The intellectual atmosphere ofBasel seemed to me enviably cosmopolitan, but the pressure oftradition was too much for me. When I came to Zurich I felt thedifference at once. Zurich relates to the world not by the intellect butby commerce. Y et here the air was free, and I had always valuedthat. Here you were not weighed down by the brown fog of thecenturies, even though one missed the rich background of culture.For Basel I have to this day a nostalgic weakness, despite the factthat I know it no longer is as it was. I still remember the days whenBachofen and Burckhardt walked in the streets, and behind thecathedral stood the old chapter house, and the old bridge over theRhine, half made of wood.For my mother it was hard that I was leaving Basel. But I knew that Icould not spare her this pain, and she bore it bravely. She livedtogether with my sister, a delicate and rather sickly nature, in everyrespect different from me. She was as though born to live the life ofa spinster, and she never married. But she developed a remarkablepersonality, and I admired her attitude. She had to undergo anoperation that was considered harmless, but she did not survive it. Iwas deeply impressed when I discovered that she had put all heraffairs in order beforehand, down to the last detail. At bottom shewas always a stranger to me, but I had great respect for her. I wasrather emotional, whereas she was always composed, though very

sensitive deep down. I could imagine her spending her days in aHome for Gentlewomen, just as the only sister of my grandfatherhad done.With my work at Burgholzli, life took on an undivided reality--allintention, consciousness, duty , and responsibility . It was an entryinto the monastery of the world, a submission to the vow to believeonly in what was probable, average, commonplace, barren ofmeaning, to renounce everything strange and significant, andreduce anything extraordinary to the banal. Henceforth there wereonly surfaces that hid nothing, only beginnings without continuations,accidents without coherence, knowledge, that shrank to eversmaller circles, failures that claimed to be problems, oppressivelynarrow horizons, and the unending desert of routine. For six monthsI locked myself within the monastic walls in order to get accustomedto the life and spirit of the asylum, and I read through the fiftyvolumes of the Allgemeine Zeitschrift for Psychiatric from its verybeginnings, in order to acquaint myself with the psychiatricmentality. I wanted to know how the human mind reacted to the sightof its own destruction, for psychiatry seemed to me an articulateexpression of that biological reaction which seizes upon the so-called healthy mind in the presence of mental illness. Myprofessional colleagues seemed to me no less interesting than thepatients. In the years that followed I secretly compiled statistics onthe hereditary background of my Swiss colleagues, and. gainedmuch instruction. I did this for my personal edification as well as forthe sake of understanding the psychiatric mentality.I need scarcely mention that my concentration and self-imposedconfinement alienated me from my colleagues. They did not know,of course, how strange psychiatry seemed to me, and how intent Iwas on penetrating into its spirit. At that time my interest in therapyhad not awakened, but the pathological variants of so-callednormality fascinated me, because they offered me the longed-for

opportunity to obtain a deeper insight into the psyche in general.These, then, were the conditions under which my career inpsychiatry began--the subjective experiment out of which myobjective life emerged. I have neither the desire nor the capacity tostand outside myself and observe my fate in a truly objective way. Iwould commit the familiar autobiographical mistake either ofweaving an illusion about how it ought to have been, or of writing anapologia pro vita sua. In the end, man is an event which cannotjudge itself, but, for better or worse, is left to the judgment of others.

IVPsychiatric ActivitiesTHE YEARS at Burgholzli were my years of apprenticeship.Dominating my interests and research was the burning question:"What actually takes place inside the mentally ill?" That wassomething which I did not understand then, nor had any of mycolleagues concerned themselves with such problems. Psychiatryteachers were not interested in what the patient had to say, butrather in how to make a diagnosis or how to describe symptomsand to compile statistics. From the clinical point of view which thenprevailed, the human personality of the patient, his individuality, didnot matter at all. Rather, the doctor was confronted with Patient X,with a long list of cut-and-dried diagnoses and a detailing ofsymptoms. Patients were labeled, rubber-stamped with adiagnosis, and, for the most part, that settled the matter. Thepsychology of the mental patient played no role whatsoever.At this point Freud became vitally important to me, especiallybecause of his fundamental researches into the psychology ofhysteria and of dreams. For me his ideas pointed the way to acloser investigation and understanding of individual cases. ; Freudintroduced psychology into psychiatry , although he himself was aneurologist.I still recollect very well a case which greatly interested me at thetime. A young woman had been admitted to the hospital, sufferingfrom "melancholia." The examination was conducted with the usualcare: anamnesis, tests, physical check-ups, and so on. The

diagnosis was schizophrenia, or "dementia praecox," in the phraseof those days. The prognosis: poor.This woman happened to be in my section. At first I did not dare toquestion the diagnosis. I was still a young man then, a beginner,and would not have had the temerity to suggest another one. Andyet the case struck me as strange. I had the feeling that it was not amatter of schizophrenia but of ordinary depression, and resolved toapply my own method. At the time I was much occupied withdiagnostic association studies, and so I undertook an associationexperiment with the patient. In addition, I discussed her dreams withher. In this way I succeeded in uncovering her past, which theanamnesis had not clarified. I obtained information directly from theunconscious, and this infomation revealed a dark and tragic story.Before the woman married she had known a man, the son of awealthy industrialist, in whom all the girls of the neighborhood wereinterested. Since she was very pretty , she thought her chances ofcatching 'him were fairly good. But apparently he did not care forher, and so she married another man.Five years later an old friend visited her. They were talking over oldtimes, and he said to her, "When you got married it was quite ashock to someone--your Mr. X" (the wealthy industrialist's son). Thatwas the moment! Her depression dated from this period, andseveral weeks later led to a catastrophe. She was bathing herchildren, first her four-year-old girl and then her two-year-old son.She lived in a country where the water supply was not perfectlyhygienic; there was pure spring water for drinking, and tainted waterfrom the river for bathing and washing. While she was bathing thelittle girl, she saw the child sucking at the sponge, but did not stopher. She even gave her little son a glass of the impure water todrink. Naturally, she did this unconsciously, or only half consciously,for her mind was already under the shadow of the incipient

depression.A short time later, after the incubation period had passed, the girlcame down with typhoid fever and died. The girl had been herfavorite. The boy was not infected. At that moment the depressionreached its acute stage, and the woman was sent to the institution.From the association test I had seen that she was a murderess,and I had learned many of the details of her secret. It was at onceapparent that this was a sufficient reason for her depression.Essentially it was a psychogenic disturbance and not a case ofschizophrenia.Now what could be done in the way of therapy? Up to then thewoman had been given narcotics to combat her insomnia and hadbeen under guard to prevent attempts at suicide. But otherwisenothing had been done. Physically, she was in good condition.I was confronted with the problem: Should I speak openly with her ornot? Should I undertake the major operation? I was faced with aconflict of duties altogether without precedent in my experience. Ihad a difficult question of conscience to answer, and had to settlethe matter with myself alone. If I had asked my colleagues, theywould probably have warned me, "For heaven's sake, don't tell thewoman any such thing. That will only make her still crazier." To mymind, the effect might well be the reverse. In general it may be saidthat unequivocal rules scarcely exist in psychology. A question canbe answered one way or another, depending on whether or not wetake the unconscious factors into account. Of course I knew verywell the personal risk I was running: if the patient got worse, I wouldbe in the soup too!Nevertheless, I decided to take a chance on a therapy whoseoutcome was uncertain. I told her everything I had discovered

through the association test. It can easily be imagined how difficult itwas for me to do this. To accuse a person point-blank of murder isno small matter. And it was tragic for the patient to have to listen toit and accept it. But the result was that in two weeks it provedpossible to discharge her, and she was never againinstitutionalized.There were other reasons that caused me to say nothing to mycolleagues about this case. I was afraid of their discussing it andpossibly raising legal questions. Nothing could be proved againstthe patient, of course, and yet such a discussion might have haddisastrous consequences for her. Fate had punished her enough! Itseemed to me more meaningful that she should return to life inorder to atone in life for her crime. When she was discharged, shedeparted bearing her heavy burden. She had to bear this burden.The loss of the child had been frightful for her, and her expiation hadalready begun with the depression and her confinement to theinstitution.In many cases in psychiatry, the patient who comes to us has astory that is not told, and which as a rule no one knows of. T o mymind, therapy only really begins after the investigation of that whollypersonal story. It is the patient's secret, the rock against which he isshattered. If I know his secret story, I have a key to the treatment.The doctor's task is to find out how to gain that knowledge. In mostcases exploration of the conscious material is insufficient.Sometimes an association test can open the way; so can theinterpretation of dreams, or long and patient human contact with theindividual. In therapy the problem is always the whole person, neverthe symptom alone. We must ask questions which challenge thewhole personality.In 1905 I became lecturer in psychiatry at the University of Zurich,and that same year I became senior physician at the Psychiatric

Clinic. I held this position for four years. Then in 1909 I had to resignbecause by this time I was simply over my head in work. In thecourse of the years I had acquired so large a private practice that Icould no longer keep up with my tasks. However, I continued myprofessorship until the year 1913. I lectured on psychopathology,and, naturally, also on the foundations of Freudian psychoanalysis,as well as on the psychology of primitives. These were my principalsubjects. During the first Semesters my lectures dealt chiefly withhypnosis, also with Janet and Flournoy. Later the problem ofFreudian psychoanalysis moved into the foreground.In my courses on hypnosis I used to inquire into the personal historyof the patients whom I presented to the students. One case I stillremember very well.A middle-aged woman, apparently with a strong religious bent,appeared one day. She was fifty-eight years old, and came oncrutches, led by her maid. For seventeen years she had beensuffering from a painful paralysis of the left leg. I placed her in acomfortable chair and asked her for her story. She began to tell it tome, and how terrible it all was--the whole long tale of her illnesscame out with the greatest circumstantiality. Finally I interrupted herand said, "Well now, we have no more time for so much talk. I amnow going to hypnotize you."I had scarcely said the words when she closed her eyes and fell intoa profound trance--without any hypnosis at all! I wondered at this,but did not disturb her. She went on talking without pause, andrelated the most remarkable dreams-- dreams that represented afairly deep experience of the unconscious. This, however, I did notunderstand until years later., At the time I assumed she was in akind of delirium. The situation was gradually growing ratheruncomfortable for me. Here were twenty students present, to whom Iwas going to demonstrate hypnosis!

After half an hour of this, I wanted to awaken the patient again. Shewould not wake up. I became alarmed; it occurred to me that I mightinadvertently have probed into a latent psychosis. It took some tenminutes before I succeeded in waking her. All the while I dared notlet the students observe my nervousness. When the woman cameto, she was giddy and confused. I said to her, "I am the doctor, andeverything is all right." Whereupon she cried out, "But I am curedI"threw away her crutches, and was able to walk. Flushed withembarrassment, I said to the students, "Now you've seen what canbe done with hypnosisl" In fact I had not the slightest idea what hadhappened.That was one of the experiences that prompted me to abandonhypnosis. I could not understand what had really happened, but thewoman was in fact cured, and departed in the best of spirits. Iasked her to let me hear from her, since I counted on a relapse intwenty-four hours at the latest. But her pains did not recur in spite ofmy skepticism, I had to accept the fact of her cure!At the first lecture of the summer semester next year, shereappeared. This time she complained of violent pains in the backwhich had, she said, begun only recently. Naturally, I asked myselfwhether there was some connection with the resumption of mylectures. Perhaps she had read the announcement of the lecture inthe newspaper. I asked her when the pain had started, and whathad caused it. She could not recall that anything had happened toher at any specitic time nor could she offer the slightest explanation.Finally I elicited the fact that the pains had actually begun on the dayand at the very hour she saw the announcement in the newspaper.That continued my guess, but I still did not see how the miraculouscure had come about. I hypnotized her once more--that is to say,she again fell spontaneously into a trance--and afterward the painwas gone.

This time I kept her after the lecture in order to find out more abouther life. It turned out that she had a feeble-minded son who was inmy department in the hospital. I knew nothing about this becauseshe bore her second husband's name and the son was a child ofher first marriage. He was her only child. Naturally, she had hopedfor a talented and successful son, and it had been a terrible blowwhen he became mentally ill at an early age. At that time I was still ayoung doctor, and represented everything she had hoped her sonmight become. Her ambitious longing to be the mother of a herotherefore fastened upon me. She adopted me as her son, andproclaimed her miraculous cure far and wide.In actual fact she was responsible for my local fame as a wizard,and since the story soon got around, I was indebted to her for myfirst private patients. My psychotherapeutic practice began with amother's putting me in the place of her mentally ill son! Naturally Iexplained the whole matter to her, in all its ramifications. She took itvery well, and did not again suffer a relapse.That was my first real therapeutic experience--I might say: my firstanalysis. I distinctly recall my talk with the old lady. She wasintelligent, and exceedingly grateful that I had taken her seriouslyand displayed concern for her fate and that of her son. This hadhelped her.In the beginning I employed hypnosis in my private practice also,but I soon gave it up because in using it one is only groping in thedark. One never knows how long an improvement or a cure will last,and I always had compunctions about working in such uncertainty.Nor was I fond of deciding on my own what the patient ought to do. Iwas much more concerned to learn from the patient himself wherehis natural bent would lead him. In order to find that out, carefulanalysis of dreams and of other manifestations of the unconscious

was necessary.During the years 1904-5 I set up a laboratory for experimentalpsychopathology at the Psychiatric Clinic. I had a number ofstudents there with whom I investigated psychic reactions(i.e.,associations). Franz Riklin, Sr., was my collaborator. Ludwig -Binswanger was currently writing his doctoral dissertation on theassociation experiment in connection with the psychogalvaniceffect, and I wrote my paper "On the Psychological Diagnosis ofFacts." There were also a number of Americans among ourassociates, including Frederick Peterson and Charles Ricksher.Their papers were published in American journals. It was theseassociation studies which later, in 1909, procured me my invitationto Clark University; I was asked to lecture on my work.Simultaneously , and independently of me, Freud was invited. Thedegree of Doctor of Laws honoris causa was bestowed on both ofus.The association experiment and the psychogalvanic experimentwere chiefly responsible for my reputation in America. Very soonmany patients from that country were coming to me. I rememberwell one of the first cases. An American colleague sent me apatient. The accompanying diagnosis read "alcoholicneurasthenia." The prognosis called him "incurable." My colleaguehad therefore taken the precaution of advising the patient to seealso a certain neurological authority in Berlin, for he expected thatmy attempt at therapy would lead to nothing. The patient came forconsultation, and after I had talked a little with him I saw that theman had an ordinary neurosis, of whose psychic origins he had noinkling. I made an association test and discovered that he wassuffering from the effects of a formidable mother complex. He camefrom a rich and respected family, had a likeable wife and no cares--externally speaking. Only he drank too much. The drinking was adesperate attempt to narcotize himself, to forget his oppressive

situation. Naturally, it did not help.His mother was the owner of a large company, and the unusuallytalented son occupied a leading post in the firm. He really shouldlong since have escaped from his oppressive subordination to hismother, but he could not summon up the resolution to throw up hisexcellent position. Thus he remained chained to his mother, whohad installed him in the business. Whenever he was with her, or hadto submit to her interference with his work, he would start drinking inorder to stupefy or discharge his emotions. A part of him did notreally want to leave the comfortably warm nest, and against his owninstincts he was allowing himself to be seduced by wealth andcomfort. After brief treatment he stopped drinking, and consideredhimself cured. But I told him, "I do not guarantee that you will notrelapse into the same state if you return to your former situation" Hedid not believe me, and returned home to America in fine fettle.As soon as he was back under his mother's influence, the drinkingbegan again. Thereupon I was called by her to a consultation duringher stay in Switzerland. She was an intelligent woman, but was areal "power devil." I saw what the son had to contend with, andrealized that he did not have the strength to resist. Physically, too,he was rather delicate and no match for his mother. I thereforedecided upon an act of force majeure. Behind his back I gave hismother a medical certificate to the effect that her son's alcoholismrendered him incapable of fululling the requirements of his job. Irecommended his discharge. This advice was followed--and theson, of course, was furious with me.Here I had done something which normally would be consideredunethical for a medical man. But I knew that for the patient's sake Ihad had to take this step.His further development? Separated from his mother, his own

personality was able to unfold. He made a brilliant career--in spiteof, or rather just because of the strong horse pill I had given him. Hiswife was grateful to me, for her husband had not only overcome hisalcoholism, but had also struck out on his own individual path withthe greatest success. Nevertheless, for years I had a guiltyconscience about this patient because I had made out thatcertificate behind his back, though I was certain that only such anact could free him. And indeed, once his liberation wasaccomplished, the neurosis disappeared.In my practice I was constantly impressed by the way the humanpsyche reacts to a crime committed unconsciously. After all, thatyonmg woman was initially not aware that she had killed her child.And yet she had fallen into a condition that appeared to be theexpression of extreme consciousness of guilt.I once had a similar case which I have never forgotten. A lady cameto my office. She refused to give her name, said it did not matter,since she wished to have only the one consultation. It was apparentthat she belonged to the upper levels of society. She had been adoctor, she said. What she had to communicate to me was aconfession; some twenty years ago she had committed a murderout of jealousy. She had poisoned her best friend because shewanted to marry the friend's husband. She had thought that if themurder was not discovered, it would not disturb her. She wanted tomarry the husband, and the simplest way was to eliminate herfriend. Moral considerations were of no importance to her, shethought.The consequences? She had in fact married the man, but he diedsoon afterward, relatively young. During the following years anumber of strange things happened. The daughter of this marriageendeavored to get away from her as soon as she was grown up.She married young and vanished from view, drew farther and

farther away, and ultimately the mother lost all contact with her.This lady was a passionate horsewoman and owned several ridinghorses of which she was extremely fond. One day she discoveredthat the horses were beginning to grow nervous under her. Even herfavorite shied and threw her. Finally she had to give up riding.Thereafter she clung to her dogs. She owned an unusually beautifulwolfhound to which she was greatly attached. As chance wouldhave it, this very dog was stricken with paralysis. With that, her cupwas full; she felt that she was morally done for. She had to confess,and for this purpose she came to me. She was a murderess, but ontop of that she had also murdered herself. For one who commitssuch a crime destroys his own soul. The murderer has alreadypassed sentence on himself. If someone has committed a crimeand is caught, he suffers judicial punishment. If he has done itsecretly, without moral consciousness of it, and remainsundiscovered, the punishment can nevertheless be visited uponhim, as our case shows. It comes out in the end. Sometimes itseems as if even animals and plants "know" it.As a result of the murder, the woman was plunged into unbearableloneliness. She had even become alienated from animals. And inorder to shake off this loneliness, she had made me share herknowledge. She had to have someone who was not a murderer toshare the secret. She wanted to find a person who could accept herconfession without prejudice, for by so doing she would achieveonce more something resembling a relationship to humanity. Andthe person would have to be a doctor rather than a professionalconfessor. She would have suspected a priest of listening to herbecause of his office, and of not accepting the facts for their ownsake but for the purpose of moral judgment. She had seen peopleand animals turn away from her, and had been so struck by thissilent verdict that she could not have endured any furthercondemnation.

I never found out who she was, nor do I have any proof that her storywas true. Sometimes I have asked myself what might have becomeof her. For that was by no means the end of her iourney. Perhapsshe was driven ultimately to suicide. I cannot lmagine how she couldhave gone on living in that utter loneliness.Clinical diagnoses are important, since they give the doctor acertain orientation; but they do not help the patient. The crucial thingis the story . For it alone shows the human background and thehuman suffering, and only at that point can the doctor's therapybegin to operate. A case demonstrated this to me most cogently.[3]The case concerned an old patient in the women's ward. She wasabout seventy-five, and had been bedridden for forty years. Almostfifty years ago she had entered the institution, but there was no oneleft who could recall her admittance; everyone who had been therehad since died. Only one head nurse, who had been working at theinstitution for thirty-five years, still remembered something of thepatient's story. The old woman could not speak, and could only takefluid or semi-fluid nourishment. She ate with her fingers, letting thefood drip off them into her mouth. Sometimes it would take heralmost two hours to consume a cup of milk. When not eating, shemade curious rhythmic motions with her hands and arms. I did notunderstand what they meant. I was profoundly impressed by thedegree of destruction that can be wrought by mental disease, butsaw no possible explanation. At the clinical lectures she used to bepresented as a catatonic form of dementia praecox, but that meantnothing to me, for these words did not contribute in the slightest toan understanding of the significance and origin of those curiousgestures.The impression this case made upon me typifies my reaction to thepsychiatry of the period. When I became an assistant, I had the

feeling that I understood nothing whatsoever about what psychiatrypurported to be. I felt extremely uncomfortable beside my chief andmy colleagues, who assumed such airs of certainty while I wasgroping perplexedly in the dark. For I regarded the main task ofpsychiatry as understanding the things that were taking place withinthe sick mind, and as yet I knew nothing about these things. Here Iwas engaged in a profession in which I did not know my way about!Late one evening, as I was walking through the ward, I saw the oldwoman still making her mysterious movements, and3 Cf. The Psychogenesis of Mental Disease (CW 3), pp. 171-72.again asked myself, "Why must this be?" Thereupon I went to ourold head nurse and asked whether the patient had always been thatway. "Yes," she replied. "But my predecessor told me she used tomake shoes." I then checked through her yellowing case historyonce more, and sure enough, there was a note to the effect that shewas in the habit of making cobbler's motions. In the pastshoemakers used to hold shoes between their knees and draw thethreads through the leather with precisely such movements. (Villagecobblers can still be seen doing this today.) When the patient diedshortly afterward, her elder brother came to the funeral. "Why didyour sister lose her sanity?" I asked him. He told me that she hadbeen in love with a shoemalcer who for some reason had notwanted to marry her, and that when he finally rejected her she had"gone off." The shoemaker movements indicated an identificationwith her sweetheart which had lasted until her death. That casegave me my first inkling of the psychic origins of dementia praecox.Henceforth I devoted all my attention to the meaningful connectionsin a psychosis.Another patient's story revealed to me the psychologicalbackground of psychosis and, above all, of the "senseless"

delusions. From this case I was able for the first time to understandthe language of schizophrenics, which had hitherto been regardedas meaningless. The patient was Babette S., whose story I havepublished elsewhere. In 1908 I delivered a lecture on her in the townhall of Zurich.She came out of the Old T own of Zurich, out of narrow, dirty streetswhere she had been born in poverty-stricken circumstances andhad grown up in a mean environment. Her sister was a prostitute,her father a drunkard. At the age of thirty-nine she succumbed to aparanoid form of dementia praecox, with characteristicmegalomania. When I saw her, she had been in the institution fortwenty years. She had served as an object lesson to hundreds ofmedical students. In her they had seen the uncanny process ofpsychic disintegration; she was a classic4 CF. "The Psychology of Dementia Precox" and "The Content of thePsychoses," in The Psychogenesis of Mental Disease (CW 3).case. Babette was completely demented and given to saying thecraziest things which made no sense at all. I tried with all my mightto understand the content of her abstruse utterances. For example,she would say, "I am the Lorelei"; the reason for that was that thedoctors, when trying to understand her case, would always say, "Ichweiss nicht, was soll es bedeuten." " Or she would wail, "I amSocrates' deputy ." That, as I discovered, was intended to mean: "Iam unjustly accused like Socrates." Absurd outbursts like: "I am thedouble polytechnic irreplaceable," or, "I am plum cake on a corn-meal bottom," "I am Germania and Helvetia of exclusively sweetbutter," "Naples and I must supply the world with noodles," signifiedan increase in her self-valuation, that is to say, a compensation forinferiority feelings.My preoccupation with Babette and other such cases convinced me

that much of what we had hitherto regarded as senseless was notas crazy as it seemed. More than once I have seen that even withsuch patients there remains in the background a personality whichmust be called normal. It stands looking on, so to speak.Occasionally, too, this personality-- usually by way of voices ordreams--can make altogether sensible remarks and objections. Itcan even, when physical illness ensues, move into the foregroundagain and make the patient. seem almost normal.I once had to treat a schizophrenic old woman who showed me verydistinctly the "normal" personality in the background. This was acase which could not be cured, only cared for. Every physician, afterall, has patients whom he cannot hope to cure, for whom he canonly smooth the path to death. She heard voices which weredistributed throughout her entire body, and a voice in the middle ofthe thorax was "God's voice.""We must rely on that voice," I said to her, and was astonished atmy own courage. As a rule this voice made very sensible remarks,and with its aid I managed very well with the patient. Once the voicesaid, "Let him test you on the Bible!" She brought along an old,tattered, much-read Bible, and at each visit I had to assign her achapter to read. The next time I had to test her on it. I did this forabout seven years, once every two5 "I know not what it means": the first line of Heine's famous poem"Dic Lorelei"weeks. At first I felt very odd in this role, but after a while I realizedwhat the lessons signified. In this way her attention was kept alert,so that she did not sink deeper into the disintegrating dream. Theresult was that after some six years the voices which had formerlybeen everywhere had retired to the left half of her body, while theright half was completely free of them. Nor had the intensity of the

phenomena been doubled on the left side; it was much the same asin the past. Hence it must be concluded that the patient was cured--at least halfway. That was an unexpected success, for I would nothave imagined that these memory exercises could have atherapeutic effect.Through my work with the patients I realized that paranoid ideasand hallucinations contain a germ of meaning. A personality, a lifehistory, a pattern of hopes and desires lie behind the psychosis.The fault is ours if we do not understand them. It dawned upon methen for the first time that a general psychology of the personalitylies concealed within psychosis, and that even here we come uponthe old human conflicts. Although patients may appear dull andapathetic, or totally imbecilic, there is more going on in their minds,and more that is meaningful, than there seems to be. At bottom wediscover nothing new and unknown in the mentally ill; rather, weencounter the substratum of our own natures.It was always astounding to me that psychiatry should have taken solong to look into the content of the psychoses. No one concernedhimself with the meaning of fantasies, or thought to ask why thispatient had one kind of fantasy, another an altogether different one;or what it signified when, for instance, a patient had the fantasy ofbeing persecuted by the Jesuits, or when another imagined that theJews wanted to poison him, or a third was convinced that the policewere after him. Such questions seemed altogether uninteresting todoctors of those days. The fantasies were simply lumped togetherunder some generic name as, for instance, "ideas of persecution."It seems equally odd to me that my investigations of that time arealmost forgotten today. Already at the beginning of the century Itreated Schizophrenia psychotherapeutically. That method,therefore, is not something that has only just been discovered. It did,however, take a long time before people began to introducepsychology into psychiatry.

While I was still at the clinic, I had to be most circumspect abouttreating my schizophrenic patients, or I would have been accused ofwoolgathering. Schizophrenia was considered incurable. If one didachieve some improvement with a case of schizophrenia, theanswer was that it had not been real schizophrenia. When Freudvisited me in Zurich in 1908, I demonstrated the case of Babette tohim. Afterward he said to me, "You know, Jung, what you havefound out about this patient is certainly interesting. But how in theworld were you able to bear spending hours and days with thisphenomenally ugly female?" I must have given him a rather dashedlook, for this idea had never occurred to me. In a way I regarded thewoman as a pleasant old creature because she had such lovelydelusions and said such interesting things. And after all, even in herinsanity , the human being emerged from a cloud of grotesquenonsense. Therapeutically, nothing was accomplished with Babette;she had been sick for too long. But I have seen other cases in whichthis kind of attentive entering into the personality of the patientproduced a lasting therapeutic effect.Regarding them from the outside, all we see of the mentally ill istheir tragic destruction, rarely the life of that side of the psychewhich is turned away from us. Outward appearances are frequentlydeceptive, as I discovered to my astonishment in the case of ayoung catatonic patient. She was eighteen years old, and camefrom a cultivated family. At the age of fifteen she had been seducedby her brother and abused by a schoolmate. From her sixteenthyear on, she retreated into isolation. She concealed herself frompeople, and ultimately the only emotional relationship left to her wasone with a vicious watch dog which belonged to another family, andwhich she tried to win over. She grew steadily odder, and atseventeen was taken to the mental hospital, where she spent a yearand a half. She heard voices, refused food, and was completely

mutistic (i.e., no long spoke). When I first saw her she was in atypical catatonic state.In the course of many weeks I succeeded, very gradually, inpersuading her to speak. After overcoming many resistances, shetold me that she had lived on the moon. The moon, it seemed, wasinhabited, but at first she had seen only men. They had at oncetaken her with them and deposited her in a sublunar dwelling wheretheir children and wives were kept. For on the high mountains of themoon there lived a vampire who kidnapped and killed the womenand children, so that the moon people were threatened withextinction. That was the reason for the sublunar existence of thefeminine half of the population.My patient made up her mind to do something for the moon people,and planned to destroy the vampire. After long preparations, shewaited for the vampire on the platform of a tower which had beenerected for this purpose. After a number of nights she at last sawthe monster approaching from afar, winging his way toward her likea great black bird. She took her long sacrificial knife, concealed itin her gown, and waited for the vampire's arrival. Suddenly he stoodbefore her. He had several pairs of wings. His face and entire figurewere covered by them, so that she could see nothing but hisfeathers. Wonder-struck, she was seized by curiosity to find outwhat he really looked like. She approached, hand on the knife.Suddenly the wings opened and a man of unearthly beauty stoodbefore her. He enclosed her in his winged arms with an iron grip, sothat she could no longer wield the knife. In any case she was sospellbound by the vampire's look that she would not have beencapable of striking. He raised her from the platform and flew off withher.After this revelation she was once again able to speak withoutinhibition, and now her resistances emerged. It seemed that I had

stopped her retum to the moon; she could no longer escape fromthe earth. This world was not beautiful, she said, but the moon wasbeautiful, and life there was rich in meaning. Sometime later shesuffered a relapse into her catatonia, and I had to have her taken toa sanatorium. For a while she was violently insane.When she was discharged after some two months, it was onceagain possible to talk with her. Gradually she came to see that lifeon earth was unavoidable. Desperately, she fought against thisconclusion and its consequences, and had to be sent back to thesanatorium. Once I visited her in her cell and said to her, "All thiswon't do you any good; you cannot return to the moon!" She tookthis in silence and with an appearance of utter apathy. This time shewas released after a short stay and resigned herself to her fate.For a while she took a job as nurse in a sanatorium. There was anassistant doctor there who made a somewhat rash approach to her.She responded with a revolver shot. Luckily , the man was onlyslightly wounded. But the incident revealed that she went about witha revolver all the time. Once before, she had turned up with aloaded gun. During the last interview, at the end of the treatment,she gave it to me. When I asked in amazement what she was doingwith it, she replied, "I would have shot you down if you had failedme!"When the excitement over the shooting had subsided, she returnedto her native town. She married, had several children, and survivedtwo world wars in the East, without ever again suffering a relapse.What can be said by way of interpretation of these fantasies? As aresult of the incest to which she had been subjected as a girl, shefelt humiliated in the eyes of the world, but elevated the realm offantasy. She had been transported into a mythic- realm; for incest istraditionally a prerogative of royalty and divinities. The

consequence was complete alienation from the world, a state ofpsychosis. She became "extramundane," as it were, and lostcontact with humanity. She plunged into cosmic distances, intoouter space, where she met with the winged demon. As is the rulewith such things, she projected his figure onto me during thetreatment. Thus I was automatically threatened with death, as waseveryone who might have persuade her to return to normal humanlife. By telling me her story she had in a sense betrayed the demonand attached herself to earthly human being. Hence she was able toreturn to life and even to marry.Thereafter I regarded the sufferings of the mentally ill in differentlight. For I had gained insight into the richness an importance oftheir inner experience.I am often asked about my psychotherapeutic or analytic method. Icannot reply unequivocally to the question. Therapy is different inevery case. When a doctor tells me that he adheres strictly to this orthat method, I have my doubts about his therapeutic effect. So muchis said in the literature about the resistance of the patient that itwould almost seem as if the doctor were trying to put somethingover on him, whereas the cure ought to grow naturally out of thepatient himself. Psycho- therapy and analysis are as varied as arehuman individuals. I treat every patient as individually as possible,because the solution of the problem is always an individual one.Universal rules can be postulated only with a grain of salt. Apsychological truth is valid only if it can be reversed. A solutionwhich would be out of the question for me may be just the right onefor someone else. "Naturally, a doctor must be familiar with the so-called "methods."But he must guard against falling into any specific, routineapproach. In general one must guard against theoreticalassumptions. T oday they may be valid, tomorrow it may be the turn

of other assumptions. In my analyses they play no part. I amunsystematic very much by intention. To my mind, in dealing withindividuals, only individual understanding will do. We need adifferent language for every patient. In one analysis I can be heardtalking the Adlerian dialect, in another the Freudian.The crucial point is that I confront the patient as one human being toanother. Analysis is a dialogue demanding two partners. Analystand patient sit facing one another, eye to eye; the doctor hassomething to say, but so has the patient.Since the essence of psychotherapy is not the application of amethod, psychiatric study alone does not suffice. I myself had towork for a very long time before I possessed the equipment forpsychotherapy. As early as 1909, I realized that I could not treatlatent psychoses if I did not understand their symbolism. It was thenthat I began to study mythology.With cultivated and intelligent patients the psychiatrist needs morethan merely professional knowledge. He must understand, asidefrom all theoretical assumptions, what really motivates the patient.Otherwise he stirs up unnecessary resistances. What counts, afterall, is not whether a theory is corroborated, but whether the patientgrasps himself as an individual. This, however, is not possiblewithout reference to the collective views, concerning which thedoctor ought to be informed. For that, mere medical training doesnot suffice, for the horizon of the human psyche embraces infinitelymore than the limited purview of the doctor's consulting room.The psyche is distinctly more complicated and inaccessible thanthe body. It is, so to speak, the half of the world which comes intoexistence only when we become conscious of it. For that reason thepsyche is not only a personal but a world problem, and thepsychiatrist has to deal with an entire world.

Nowadays we can see as never before that the peril whichthreatens all of us comes not from nature, but from man, from thepsyches of the individual and the mass. The psychic aberration ofman is the danger. Everything depends upon whether or not ourpsyche functions properly. If certain persons lose their headsnowadays, a hydrogen bomb will go off.The psychotherapist, however, must understand not only the patient;it is equally important that he should understand himself. For thatreason the sine quo non is the analysis of the analyst, what is calledthe training analysis. The patient's treatment begins with the doctor,so to speak. Only if the doctor knows how to cope with himself andhis own problems will he be able to teach the patient to do thesame. Only then. In the training analysis the doctor must learn toknow his own psyche; and to take it seriously. If he cannot do that,the patient will not learn either. He will lose a portion of his psyche,just as the doctor has lost that portion of his psyche which he hasnot learned to understand. It is not enough, therefore, for the traininganalysis to consist in acquiring a system of concepts. Theanalysand must realize that it concerns himself, that the traininganalysis is a bit of real life and is not a method which can belearned by rote. The student who does not grasp that fact in his owntraining analysis will have to pay dearly for the failure later on.Though there is treatment known as "minor psychotherapy," in anythoroughgoing analysis the whole personality of both patient anddoctor is called into play. There are many cases which the doctorcannot cure without committing himself. When important mattersare at stake, it makes all the difference whether the doctor seeshimself as a part of the drama, or cloaks himself in his authority. Inthe great crises of life, in the supreme moments when to be or notto be is the question, little tricks of suggestion do not help. Then thedoctor's whole being is challenged.

The therapist must at all times keep watch over himself, over theway he is reacting to his patient. For we do not react only with ourconsciousness. Also we must always be asking ourselves: How isour unconscious experiencing this situation? We must thereforeobserve our dreams, pay the closest attention and study ourselvesjust as carefully as we do the patient. Otherwise the entire treatmentmay go off the rails. I shall give a single example of this.I once had a patient, a highly intelligent woman, who for variousreasons aroused my doubts. At first the analysis went very well, butafter a while I began to feel that I was no longer getting at thecorrect interpretation of her dreams, and I thought I also noticed anincreasing shallowness in our dialogue. I therefore decided to talkwith my patient about this, since it had of course not escaped herthat something was going wrong. The night before I was to speakwith her, I had the following dream.I was walking down a highway through a valley in late-afternoonsunlight. T o my right was a steep hill. At its top stood a castle, andon the highest tower there was a woman sitting on a kind ofbalustrade. In order to see her properly, I had to bend my head farback. I awoke with a crick in the back of my neck. Even in thedream I had recognized the woman as my patient.The interpretation was immediately apparent to me. If in the dream Ihad to look up at the patient in this fashion, in reality I had probablybeen looking down on her. Dreams are, after all, compensations forthe conscious attitude. I told her of the dream and my interpretation.This produced an immediate change in the situation, and thetreatment once more began to move forward.As a doctor I constantly have to ask myself what kind of messagethe patient is bringing me. What does he mean to me? If he means

nothing, I have no point of attack. The doctor is effective only whenhe himself is affected. "Only the wounded physician heals." Butwhen the doctor wears his personality like a coat of armor, he hasno effect. I take my patients seriously. Perhaps I am confronted witha problem just as much as they. It often happens that the patient isexactly the right plaster for the doctor's sore spot. Because this isso, duffcult situations can arise for the doctor too--or rather,especially for the doctor.Every therapist ought to have a control by some third person, sothat he remains open to another point of view. Even the pope has aconfessor. I always advise analysts: "Have a father confessor, or amother confessor!" Women are particularly gifted for playing such apart. They often have excellent intuition and a trenchant criticalinsight, and can see what men have up their sleeves, at times seealso into men's anima intrigues. They see aspects that the mandoes not see. That is why no woman has ever been convinced thather husband is a superman!It is understandable that a person should undergo analysis if he hasa neurosis; but if he feels he is normal, he is under no compulsion todo so. Y et I can assure you, I have had some astonishingexperiences with so-called "normality." Once I encountered anentirely "normal" pupil. He was a doctor, and came to me with thebest recommendations from an old colleague. He had been hisassistant and had later taken over practice. Now he had a normalpractice, normal success, a normal wife, normal children, lived in anormal little house in a normal little town, had a normal income andprobably a normal. diet. He wanted to be an analyst. I said to him,"Do you know what that means? It means that you must first learn toknow yourself. You yourself are the instrument. If you are not right,how can the patient be made right? If you are not convinced, howcan you convince him? Y ou yourself must be the real stuff. If you arenot, God help you! Then you will lead patients astray. Therefore you

must first accept an analysis of yourself.That was all right, the man said, but almost at once followed thiswith: "I have no problems to tell you about." That should have been awarning to me. I said, "Very well, then we can examine yourdreams? "I have no dreams," he said. "Y ou will soon have some," Iresponded. Anyone else would probably have dreamt that verynight. But he was unable to recall any dreams. So it went on forabout two weeks, and I began to feel rather uneasy about the wholeaffair.At last an impressive dream turned up. I am going to tell it becauseit shows how important it is, in practical psychiatry , to understanddreams. He dreamt that he was traveling by railroad. The train hada two-hour stop in a certain city. Since he did not know the city andwanted to see something of it, he set out toward the city center.There he found a medieval building, probably the town hall, andwent into it. He wandered down long corridors and came uponhandsome rooms, their walls lined with old paintings and linetapestries. Precious old objects stood about. Suddenly he saw thatit had grown darker, and the sun had set. He thought, I must getback to the railroad station. At this moment he discovered that hewas lost, and no longer knew where the exit was. He started inalarm, and simultaneously realized that he had not met a singleperson in this building. He began to feel uneasy, and quickened hispace, hoping to run into someone. But he met no one. Then hecame to a large door, and thought with relief: That is the exit. Heopened the door and discovered that he had stumbled upon agigantic room. It was so huge and dark that he could not even seethe opposite wall. Profoundly alarmed, the dreamer ran across thegreat, empty room, hoping to find the exit on the other side. Then hesaw--precisely in the middle of the room--something white on thefloor. As he approached he discovered that it was an idiot child of

about two years old. It was sitting on a chamber pot and hadsmeared itself with feces. At that moment he awoke with a cry, in astate of panic.I knew all I needed to know--here was a latent psychosis! I must sayI sweated as I tried to lead him out of that dream. I had to representit to him as something quite innocuous, and gloss over all theperilous details.What the dream says is approximately this: the trip on which he setsout is the trip to Zurich. He remains there, however, for only a shorttime. The child in the center of the room is himself as a two-year-oldchild. In small children, such uncouth behavior is somewhat unusual,but still possible. They may be intrigued by their feces, which arecolored and have an odd smell. Raised in a city environment, andpossibly along strict lines, a child might easily be guilty of such afailing.But the dreamer, the doctor, was no child; he was a grown man.And therefore the dream image in the center of the room is asinister symbol. When he told me the dream, I realized that hisnormality was a compensation. I had caught him in the nick of time,for the latent psychosis was within a hair's breadth of breaking outand becoming manifest. This had to be prevented. Finally, with theaid of one of his other dreams, I succeeded in finding anacceptable pretext for ending the training analysis. We were both ofus very glad to stop. I had not informed him of my diagnosis, but hehad probably become aware that he was on the verge of a fatalpanic, for he had a dream in which he was being pursued by adangerous maniac. Immediately afterward he returned home. Henever again stirred up the unconscious. His emphatic normalityreflected a personality which would not have been developed butsimply shattered by a confrontation with the unconscious. Theselatent psychoses are the bétes noires of psychotherapists, since

they are often very difficult to recognize.With this, we come to the question of lay analysis. I am in favor ofnon-medical men studying psychotherapy and practicing it; but indealing with latent psychoses there is the risk of their makingdangerous mistakes. Therefore I favor laymen working as analysts,but under the guidance of a professional physician. As soon as alay analyst feels the slightest bit uncertain, he ought to consult hismentor. Even for doctors it is difficult to recognize and treat a latentschizophrenia; all the more so for laymen. But I have repeatedlyfound that laymen who have practiced psychotherapy for years, andwho have themselves been in analysis, are shrewd and capable.Moreover there are not enough doctors practicing psychotherapy.For such practice, long and thorough training is necessary, and awide culture which very few possess.The relationship between doctor and patient, especially when atransference on the part of the patient occurs, or a more or lessunconscious identification of doctor and patient, can lead toparapsychological phenomena. I have frequently run into this. Onesuch case which was particularly impressive was that of a patientwhom I had pulled out of a psychogenic depression. He went backhome and married; but I did not care for his wife. The first time I sawher, I had an uneasy feeling. Her husband was grateful to me, and Iobserved that I was a thorn in her side because of my influence overhim. It frequently happens that women who do not really love theirhusbands are jealous and destroy their friendships. They want thehusband to belong entirely to them because they themselves do notbelong to him. The kernel of all jealousy is lack of love.The wife's attitude placed a tremendous burden on the patientwhich he was incapable of coping with. Under its pressure herelapsed, after a year of marriage, into a new depression.Foreseeing this possibility, I had arranged with him that he was to

get in touch with me at once if he observed his spirits sinking. Heneglected to do so, partly because of his wife, who scoffed at hismoods. I heard not a word from him.At that time I had to deliver a lecture in B. I returned to my hotelaround midnight. I sat with some friends for a while after the lecture,then went to bed, but I lay awake for a long time. At about twoo'clock--I must have just fallen asIeep--I awoke with a start, and hadthe feeling that someone had come into the room; I even had theimpression that the door had been hastily opened. I instantly turnedon the light, but there was nothing. Someone might have mistakenthe door, I thought, and I looked into the corridor. But it was still asdeath. "Odd," I thought, "someone did come into the room!" Then Itried to recall exactly what had happened, and it occurred to me thatI had been awakened by a feeling of dull pain, as though somethinghad struck my forehead and then the back of my skull. The followingday I received a telegram saying that my patient had committedsuicide. He had shot himself. Later, I learned that the bullet hadcome to rest in the back wall of the skull. This experience was agenuine synchronistic phenomenon such as is quite often observedin connection with an archetypal situation--in this case, death. Bymeans of a relativization of time and space in the unconscious itcould well be that I had perceived something which in reality wastaking place elsewhere. The collective unconscious is common toall; it is the foundation of what the ancients called the "sympathy ofall things." In this case the unconscious had knowledge of mypatient's condition. All that evening, in fact, I had felt curiouslyrestive and nervous, very much in contrast to my usual mood.I never try to convert a patient to anything, and never exercise anycompulsion. What matters most to me is that the patient shouldreach his own view of things. Under my treatment a paganbecomes a pagan and a Christian a Christian, a Jew a Jew,according to what his destiny prescribes for him.

I well recall the case of a Jewish woman who had lost her faith. Itbegan with a dream of mine in which a young girl, unknown to me,came to me as a patient. She outlined her case to me, and whileshe was talking, I thought, "I don't understand her at all. I don'tunderstand what it is all about." But suddenly it occurred to me thatshe must have an unusual father complex. That was the dream.For the next day I had down in my appointment book a consultationfor four o'clock. A young woman appeared. She was Jewish,daughter of a wealthy banker, pretty, chic, and highly intelligent. Shehad already undergone an analysis, but the doctor acquired atransference to her and finally begged her not to come to him anymore, for if she did, it would mean the destruction of his marriage.The girl had been suffering for years from a severe anxietyneurosis, which this experience naturally worsened. I began with ananamnesis, but could discover nothing special. She was well-adapted, Westernized Jewess, enlightened down to her bones. Atfirst I could not understand what her trouble was. Suddenly mydream occurred to me, and I thought, "Good Lord, so this is the littlegirl of my dream." Since, however, I could detect not a trace of afather complex in her, I asked her, as I am in the habit of doing insuch cases, about her grandfather. For a brief moment she closedher eyes, and I realized at once that here lay the heart of theproblem. I therefore asked her to tell me about this grandfather, andlearned that he had been a rabbi and had belonged to a jewishsect. "Do you mean the Chassidim?" I asked. She said yes. Ipursued my questioning. "If he was a rabbi, was he by any chance azaddik?" "Yes," she replied, "it is said that he was a kind of saintand also possessed second sight. But that is all nonsense. There isno such thing!"With that I had concluded the anamnesis and understood the history

of her neurosis. I explained to her, "Now I am going to tell yousomething that you may not be able to accept. Y our grandfatherwas a zaddik. Your father became an apostate to the Jewish faith.He betrayed the secret and turned his back on God. And you haveyour neurosis because the fear of God has got into you." That struckher like a bolt of lightning.The following night I had another dream. A reception was takingplace in my house, and behold, this girl was there too. She came upto me and asked, "Haven't you got an umbrella? It is raining sohard." I actually found an umbrella, fumbled around with it to open it,and was on the point of giving it to her. But what happened instead?I handed it to her on my knees, as if she were a goddess.I told this dream to her, and in a week the neurosis had vanished."The dream had showed me that she was not just a superficial littlegirl, but that beneath the surface were the makings of a saint. Shehad no mythological ideas, and therefore the most essential featureof her nature could find no way to express itself. All her consciousactivity was directed toward flirtation, clothes, and sex, becauseshe knew of nothing else. She knew only the intellect and lived ameaningless life. In reality she was a child of God whose destinywas to fulfill His secret will. I had to awaken mythological andreligious ideas in her, for she belonged to that class of humanbeings of whom spiritual activity6 This case is distinguished from most of Jung's cases by the brevity of thetreatment.--A. J.is demanded. Thus her life took on a meaning, and no trace of theneurosis was left. In this case I had applied no "method," but hadsensed the presence of the numen. My explaining this to her hadaccomplished the cure. Method did not matter here; what matteredwas the "fear of God."[7]

I have frequently seen people become neurotic when they contentthemselves with inadequate or wrong answers to the questions oflife. They seek position, marriage, reputation, outward success ormoney, and remain unhappy and neurotic even when they haveattained what they were seeking. Such people are usually confinedwithin too narrow a spiritual horizon. Their has not sufficient content,sufficient meaning. If they are enabled to develop into morespacious personalities, the neurosis generally disappears. For thatreason the idea of development was always of the highestimportance to me.The majority of my patients consisted not of believers but those whohad lost their faith. The ones who came to me were the lost sheep.Even in this day and age the believer has the opportunity , in hischurch, to live the "symbolic life." We need only think of theexperience of the Mass, of baptism, of imitatio Christi, and manyother aspects of religion. But to live and experience symbolspresupposes a vital participation on part of the believer, and onlytoo often this is lacking in people today. In the neurotic it ispractically always lacking. In such cases we have to observewhether the unconscious will not spontaneously bring up symbols toreplace what is lacking. But the question remains of whether aperson who has symbolic dreams or visions will also be able tounderstand their meaning and take the consequences upon himself.There is, for example, the case of the theologian which I describedin "Archetypes of the Collective Unconscious." [8] He had a certaindream which was frequently repeated. He dream that he wasstanding on a slope from which he had a beautiful7 Cf. The Symbolic Life, Pastoral Psychology Guild I..ecture, No. Bo(London 1954). p- 18. 8 The Archetypes and the Collective Unconscious(CW 9, i), pp. 17-18.

view of a low valley covered with dense woods. In the dream heknew that in the middle of the woods there was a lake, and he alsoknew that hitherto something had always prevented him from goingthere. But this time he wanted to carry out his plan. As heapproached the lake, the atmosphere grew uncanny, and suddenlya light gust of wind passed over the surface of the water, whichrippled darkly. He awoke with a cry of terror.At first this dream seems incomprehensible. But as a theologianthe dreamer should have remembered the "pool" whose waterswere stirred by a sudden wind, and in which the sick were bathed--the pool of Bethesda. An angel descended and touched the water,which thereby acquired curative powers. The light wind is thepneuma which bloweth where it listeth And that terrified thedreamer. An unseen presence is suggested, a numen that lives itsown life and in whose presence man shudders. The dreamer wasreluctant to accept the association with the pool of Bethesda. Hewanted nothing of it, for such things are met with only in the Bible, orat most on Sunday mornings as the subjects of sermons, and havenothing to do with psychology. All very well to speak of the HolyGhost on occasions--but it is not a phenomenon to be experienced!I knew that the dreamer should have overcome his fright and, as itwere, got over his panic. But I never force the issue if a patient isunwilling to go the way that has been revealed to him and take theconsequences. I do not subscribe to the facile assumption that thepatient is blocked merely by ordinary resistances. Resistances--especially when they are stubborn--merit attention, for they are oftenwarnings which must not be overlooked. The cure may be a poisonthat not everyone can take, or an operation which, when it iscontraindicated, can prove fatal.Wherever there is a reaching down into innermost experience, intothe nucleus of personality, most people are overcome by fright, and

many run away. Such was the case with this theologian. I am ofcourse aware that theologians are in a more difficult situation thanothers. On the one hand they are closer to religion, but on the otherhand they are more bound by church and dogma. The risk of innerexperience, the adventure of the spirit, is in any case alien to mosthuman beings. The possibility that such experience might havepsychic reality is anathema to them. All very well if it has asupernatural or at least a "historical" foundation. But psychic? Faceto face with this question, the patient will often show anunsuspected but profound contempt for the psyche.In contemporary psychotherapy the demand is often made that thedoctor or psychotherapist should "go along" with the patient and hisaffects. I don't consider that to be always the right course.Sometimes active intervention on the part of the doctor is required.Once a lady of the aristocracy came to me who was in the habit ofslapping her employees--including her doctors. She suffered from acompulsion neurosis and had been under treatment in asanatorium. Naturally, she had soon dispensed the obligatory slapto the head physician. In her eyes, after all, was only a superior valetde chambre. She was paying the bills wasn't she? This doctor senther on to another institution and there the same scene wasrepeated. Since the lady was not really insane, but evidently had tobe handled with kid gloves the hapless doctor sent her on to me.She was a very stately and imposing person, six feet tall--and therewas power behind her slaps, I can tell you! She came, then, and wehad a very good talk. Then came the moment when I had to saysomething unpleasant to her. Furious, she sprang her feet andthreatened to slap me. I, too, jumped up, and said to her, "Very well,you are the lady. You hit first--ladies first! But then I hit back!" And Imeant it. She fell back into her chair and deflated before my eyes."No one has ever said that to me beforel" she protested. From that

moment on, the therapy began to succeed.What this patient needed was a masculine reaction. In this case itwould have been entirely wrong to "go along." That would havebeen worse than useless. She had a compulsion nerosis becauseshe could not impose moral restraint upon herself. Such peoplemust then have some other form of restraint--and along come thecompulsive symptoms to serve the purpose. Y ears ago I once drewup statistics on the results of my treatments. I no longer recall thefigures exactly; but, on a conservative estimate, a third of my caseswere really cured, a third considerably improved, and a third notessentially influenced. But it is precisely the unimproved caseswhich are hardest to judge, because many things are not realizedand understood by the patients until years afterward, and only thencan they take effect. How often former patients have written to me: "Idid not realize what it was really all about until ten years after I hadbeen with you."I have had a few cases who ran out on me; very rarely indeed have Ihad to send a patient away. But even among them were some wholater sent me positive reports. That is why it is often so difficult todraw conclusions as to the success of a treatment.It is obvious that in the course of his practice a doctor will comeacross people who have a great effect on him too. He meetspersonalities who, for better or worse, never stir the interest of thepublic and who nevertheless, or for that very reason, possessunusual qualities, or whose destiny it is to pass throughunprecedented developments and disasters. Sometimes they arepersons of extraordinary talents, who might well inspire another togive his life for them; but these talents may be implanted in sostrangely unfavorable a psychic disposition that we cannot tellwhether it is a question of genius or of fragmentary development.Frequently, too, in this unlikely soil there flower rare blossoms of the

psyche which we would never have thought to find in the flatlands ofsociety. For psychotherapy to be effective a close rapport isneeded, so close that the doctor cannot shut his eyes to the heightsand depths of human suffering. The rapport consists, after all, in aconstant comparison find mutual comprehension, in the dialecticalconfrontation of two opposing psychic realities. If for some reasonthese mutual impressions do not impinge on each other, thepsychotherapeutic process remains ineffective, and no change isproduced. Unless both doctor and patient become a problem toeach other, no solution is found.Among the so-called neurotics of our day there are a good manywho in other ages would not have been neurotic--that is, dividedagainst themselves. If they had lived in a period and in a milieu inwhich man was still linked by myth with the world of the ancestors,and thus with nature truly experienced and not merely seen fromoutside, they would have been spared this division with themselves.I am speaking of those who cannot tolerate the loss of myth andwho can neither find a way to a merely exterior world, to the worldas seen by science, nor rest satisfied with an intellectual jugglingwith words, which has nothing whatsoever to do with wisdom.These victims of the psychic dichotomy of our time are merelyoptional neurotics; their apparent morbidity drops away the momentthe gulf between the ego and the unconscious is closed. The doctorwho has felt this dichotomy to the depths of his being will also beable to reach a better understanding of the unconscious psychicprocesses, and will be saved from the danger of inflation to whichthe psychologist is prone. The doctor who does not know from hisown experience the numinosity of the archetypes will scarcely beable to escape their negative effect when he encounters it in hispractice. He will tend to over- or under-estimate it, since hepossesses only an intellectual point of view but no empiricalcriterion. This is where those perilous aberrations begin, the first of

which is the attempt to dominate everything by the intellect. Thisserves the secret purpose of placing both doctor and patient at asafe distance from the archetypal effect and thus from realexperience, and of substituting for psychic reality an apparentlysecure, artificial, but merely two-dimensional conceptual world inwhich the reality of life is well covered up by so-called clearconcepts. Experience is stripped of its substance, and insteadmere names are substituted, which are henceforth put in the placeof reality. No one has any obligations to a concept; that is what is soagreeable about conceptuality--it promises protection fromexperience. The spirit does not dwell in concepts, but in deeds andin facts. Words butter no parsnips; nevertheless, this futileprocedure is repeated ad infinitum.In my experience, therefore, the most difficult as well as the mostungrateful patients, apart from habitual liars, are the so- calledintellectuals. With them, one hand never knows what the other handis doing. They cultivate a "compartment psychology ." Anything canbe settled by an intellect that is not subject to the control of feeling--and yet the intellectual still suffers from a neurosis if feeling isundeveloped.From my encounters with patients and with the psychic phenomenawhich they have paraded before me in an endless stream ofimages, I have learned an enormous amount--not just knowledge,but above all insight into my own nature. And not the least of what Ihave learned has come from my errors and defeats. I have hadmainly women patients, who often entered into the work withextraordinary conscientiousness, understanding, and intelligence. Itwas essentially because of them that I was able to strike out on newpaths in therapy.A number of my patients became my disciples in the original senseof the word, and have carried my ideas out into the world. Among

them I have made friendships that have endured decade afterdecade.My patients brought me so close to the reality of human life that Icould not help learning essential things from them. Encounters withpeople of so many different kinds and on so many differentpsychological levels have been for me incomparably moreimportant than fragmentary conversations with celebrities. Thefinest and most significant conversations of my life wereanonymous.

VSigmund FreudI EMBARKED on the adventure of my intellectual development bybecoming a psychiatrist. In all innocence I began observing mentalpatients, clinically, from the outside, and thereby came uponpsychic processes of a striking nature. I noted and classified thesethings without the slightest understanding of their contents, whichwere considered to be adequately evaluated when they weredismissed as "pathological." In the course of time my interestfocused more and more. upon cases in which I experiencedsomething understandable--that is, cases of paranoia, manic-depressive insanity, and psychogenic disturbances. From the startof my psychiatric career the studies of Breuer and Freud, along withthe work of Pierre Janet, provided me with a wealth of suggestionsand stimuli. Above all, I found that Freud's technique of dreamanalysis and dream interpretation cast a valuable light uponschizophrenic forms of expression. As early as 1900 I had readFreud's The Imrerpretation of Dreams?1 This chapter should be regarded as a supplement to Jung's numerouswritings Freud. The most important of these are contained in Freud andPsychoanalysis (CW 4). Cf. also "Sigmund Freud in His Historical Setting"(1934) and "Memory of Sigmund Freud" (1939), in The Spirit in Man, Art,and Literature (CW 15). .I had laid the book aside, at the time, because I did not yet grasp it.At the age of twenty-five I lacked the experience to appreciateFreud's theories. Such experience did not come until later. In 1903 Ionce more took up The Interpretation of Dreams and discovered

how it all linked up with my own ideas. What chiefly interested mewas the application to dreams of the concept of the repressionmechanism, which was derived from the psychology of theneuroses. This was important to me because I had frequentlyencountered repressions in my experiments with word association;in response to certain stimulus words the patient either had noassociative answer or was unduly slow in his reaction time. As waslater discovered, such a disturbance occurred each time thestimulus word had touched upon a psychic lesion or conflict. In mostcases the patient was unconscious of this. When questioned aboutthe cause of the disturbance, he would often answer in a peculiarlyartificial manner. My reading of Freud's The Interpretation ofDreams showed me that the repression mechanism was at workhere, and that the facts I had observed were consonant with histheory. Thus I was able to corroborate Freud's line of argument. Thesituation was different when it came to the content of therepression. Here I could not agree with Freud. He considered thecause of the repression to be a sexual trauma. From my practice,however, I was familiar with numerous cases of neurosis in whichthe question of sexuality played a subordinate part, other factorsstanding in the foreground--for example, the problem of socialadaptation, of oppression by tragic circumstances of life, prestigeconsiderations, and so on. Later I presented such cases to Freud;but he would not grant that factors other than sexuality could be thecause. That was highly unsatisfactory to me.At the beginning it was not easy for me to assign Freud the properplace in my life, or to take the right attitude toward him. When Ibecame acquainted with his work I was planning an2 In his obituary on Freud (1939), Jung calls this work "epoch--making" andprobably the boldest attempt that has ever been made to master the riddlesof the unconscious psyche upon the apparently firm ground of empiricism.For us, then young psychiatrists, it was... a source of illumination, while for

our older colleagues it was an object of mockery."--A. J.academic career, and was about to complete a paper that wasintended to advance me at the university . But Freud was definitelypersona non grata in the academic world at the time, and anyconnection with him would have been damaging in scientific circles."Important people" at most mentioned him surreptitiously , and atcongresses he was discussed only in the corridors, never on thefloor. Therefore the discovery that my association experiments werein agreement with Freud's theories was far from pleasant to me.Once, while I was in my laboratory and reflecting again upon thesequestions, the devil whispered to me that I would be justified inpublishing the results of my experiments and my conclusionswithout mentioning Freud. After all, I had worked out myexperiments long before I understood his work. But then I heard thevoice of my second personality: "If you do a thing like that, as if youhad no knowledge of Freud, it would be a piece of trickery. Youcannot build your life upon a lie." With that, the question was settled.From then on I became an open partisan of Freud's and fought forhim.I first took up the cudgels for Freud at a congress in Munich where alecturer discussed obsessional neuroses but studiously forbore tomention the name of Freud. In 1906, in connection with this incident,I wrote a paper " for the Munchner Medizini- sche Woohenschrift onFreud's theory of the neuroses, which l had contributed a great dealto the understanding of obsessional neuroses. In response to thisarticle, two German professors wrote to me, warning that if Iremained on Freud's side and continued to defend him, I would beendangering my academic career. I replied: "If what Freud says isthe truth, I am with him. I don't give a damn for a career if it has to bebased on the premise of restricting research and concealing thetruth." And I went on defending Freud and his ideas. But on the

basis of my own findings I was still unable to feel that all neuroseswere caused by sexual repression or sexual traumata. In certain3 "Die Hysterielehre Freuds: Eine Erwiderung auf die AschaffenburgscheKritik," Munehener medizinische Wocheewchrift, LIII (November, 1906), 47;English trans.: "Freud's Theory of Hysteria: A Reply to Aschaffcnburg, inFreud and Psychoanalysis ( CW 4).cases that was so, but not in others. Nevertheless, Freud hadopened up a new path of investigation, and the shocked out- criesagainst him at the time seemed to me absurd.[4]I had not met with much sympathy for the ideas expressed in "ThePsychology of Dementia Praecox." In fact, my colleagues laughedat me. But through this book I came to know Freud. He invited me tovisit him, and our first meeting took place in Vienna in March 1907.We met at one o'clock in the afternoon and talked virtually without apause for thirteen hours. Freud was the first man of real importanceI had encountered; in my experience up to that time, no one elsecould compare with him. There was nothing the least trivial in hisattitude. I found him extremely intelligent, shrewd, and altogetherremarkable. And yet my first impressions of him remainedsomewhat tangled; I could not make him out.What he said about his sexual theory impressed me. Nevertheless,his words could not remove my hesitations and doubts. I tried toadvance these reservations of mine on several occasions, but eachtime he would attribute them to my lack of experience.Freud was right; in those days I had not enough experience tosupport my objections. I could see that his sexual theory wasenormously important to him, both personally and philosophically.This impressed me, but I could not decide to what extent this strongemphasis upon sexuality was connected with subjective prejudicesof his, and to what extent it rested upon verifiable experiences.

Above all, Freud's attitude toward the spirit seemed to me highlyquestionable. Wherever, in a person or in a work of art, anexpression of spirituality (in the intellectual, not the supernaturalsense) came to light, he suspected it, and insinuated that it wasrepressed sexuality. Anything that could not be directly interpretedas sexuality he referred to as "psychosexuality."" In 1906, after Jung sent Freud DiagnostischeAssoziatiorzsstudien (1906; English trans. of Jung's contributions inExperimental Researches, CW 2),I protested that this hypothesis, carried to its logical conclusion,would lead to an annihilating judgment upon culture. Culture wouldthen appear as a mere farce, the morbid consequence ofrepressed sexuality. "Y es," he assented, "so it is, and that is just acurse of fate against which we are powerless to contend." I was byno means disposed to agree, Or to let it go at that, but still I did notfeel competent to argue it out with him.There was something else that seemed to me significant at that firstmeeting. It had to do with things which I was able to think out andunderstand only after our friendship was over. There was nomistaking the fact that Freud was emotionally involved in his sexualtheory to an extraordinary degree. When he spoke of it, his tonebecame urgent, almost anxious, and all signs of his normally criticaland skeptical manner vanished. A strange, deeply movedexpression came over his face, the cause Of which I was at a lossto understand. I had a strong intuition that for him sexuality was asort of numinosum. This was confirmed by a conversation whichtook place some three years later (in, 1910), again in Vienna.I can still recall vividly how Freud said to me, "My dear Jung,promise me never to abandon the sexual theory. That is the most

essential thing of all. Y ou see, we must make a dogma of it, anunshakable bulwark." He said that to me with great emotion, thetone of a father saying, "And promise me this one thing, my dearson: that you will go to church every Sunday." In some astonishmentI asked him, "A bulwark--against what?" which he replied, "Againstthe black tide of mud"--and here hesitated for a moment, thenadded--"Of occultism." First of all, it was the words "bulwark" and"dogma" that alarmed me; for a dogma, that is to say , anundisputable confession of faith is set up only when the aim is tosuppress doubts once and for all. But that no longer has anything todo with scientific judgment; only with a personal power drive.This was the thing that struck at the heart of our friendship. I knewthat I would never be able to accept such an attitude. What Freudseemed to mean by "Occultism" was virtually everything thatphilosophy and religion, including the rising contemporary scienceof parapsychology, had learned about the psyche. T o me the sexualtheory was just as occult, that is to say, just as unproven anhypothesis, as many other speculative views. As I saw it, a scientifictruth was a hypothesis which might be adequate for the moment butwas not to be preserved as an article of faith for all time.Although I did not properly understand it then, I had observed inFreud the eruption of unconscious religious factors. Evidently hewanted my aid in erecting a barrier against these threateningunconscious contents. The impression this conversation madeupon me added to my confusion; until then I had not consideredsexuality as a precious and imperiled concept to which one mustremain faithful. Sexuality evidently meant more to Freud than toother people. For him it was something to be religiously observed.In the face of such deep convictions one generally becomes shyand reticent. After a few stammering attempts on my part, theconversation soon came to an end.

I was bewildered and embarrassed. I had the feeling that I hadcaught a glimpse of a new, unknown country from which swarms ofnew ideas flew to meet me. One thing was clear: Freud, who hadalways made much of his irreligiosity, had now constructed adogma; or rather, in the place of a jealous God whom he had lost,he had substituted another compelling image, that of sexuality. Itwas no less insistent, exacting, domineering, threatening, andmorally ambivalent than the original one. Just as the psychicallystronger agency is given "divine" or "daemonic" attributes, so the"sexual libido" took over the role of a deus absconditus, a hidden orconcealed god. The advantage of this transformation for Freudwas, apparently, that he was able to regard the new numinousprinciple as scientifically irreproachable and free from all religioustaint. At bottom, however, the numinosity, that is, the psychologicalqualities of the two rationally incommensurable opposites--Y ahwehand sexuality--remained the same. The name alone had changed,and with it, of course, the point of view: the lost god had now to besought below, not above. But what difference does it make,ultimately, to the stronger agency if it is called now by one nameand now by another? If psychology did not exist, but only concreteobjects, the one would actually have been destroyed and replacedby the other. But in reality, that is to say, in psychologicalexperience, there is not one whit the less of urgency, anxiety,compulsiveness, etc. The problem still remains: how to overcomeor escape our anxiety, bad conscience, guilt, compulsion,unconsciousness, and instinctuality. If we cannot do this from thebright, idealistic side, then perhaps we shall have better luck byapproaching the problem from the dark, biological side.Like flames suddenly flaring up, these thoughts darted through mymind. Much later, when I reflected upon Freud's character, theyrevealed their significance. There was one characteristic of his thatpreoccupied me above all: his bitterness. It had struck me at our

first encounter, but it remained inexplicable to me until I was able tosee it in connection with his attitude toward sexuality. Although, forFreud, sexuality was undoubtedly a numinosum, his terminologyand theory seemed to define it exclusively as a biological function. Itwas only the emotionality with which he spoke of it that revealed thedeeper elements reverberating within him. Basically, he wanted toteach--or so at least it seemed to me--that, regarded from within,sexuality included spirituality and had an intrinsic meaning. But hisconcretistic terminology was too narrow to express this idea. Hegave me the impression that at bottom he was working against hisown goal and against himself; and there is, after all, no harsherbitterness than that of a person who is his own worst enemy. In hisown words, he felt himself menaced by a "black tide of mud"--hewho more than anyone else had tried to let down his buckets intothose black depths.Freud never asked himself why he was compelled to talk continuallyof sex, why this idea had taken such possession of him. Heremained unaware that his "monotony of interpretation" expresseda flight from himself, or from that other side of him which mightperhaps be called mystical. So long as he refused to acknowledgethat side, he could never be reconciled with himself. He was blindtoward the paradox and ambiguity of the contents of theunconscious, and did not know that everything which arises out ofthe unconscious has a top and a bottom, an inside and an outside.When we speak of the outside--and that is what Freud did--we areconsidering only half of the whole, with the result that a countereffectarises out of the unconscious.There was nothing to be done about this one-sidedness of Freud's.Perhaps some inner experience of his own might have opened hiseyes; but then his intellect would have reduced any such experienceto "mere sexuality" or "psychosexuality." He remained the victim ofthe one aspect he could recognize, and for that reason I see him as

a tragic figure; for he was a great man, and what is more, a man inthe grip of his daimon.After that second conversation in Vienna I also understood AlfredAdIer's power hypothesis, to which I had hitherto paid scantattention. Like many sons, Adler had learned from his "father" notwhat the father said, but what he did. Instantly, the problem of love(Eros) and power came down upon me like a leaden weight. Freudhimself had told me that he had never read Nietzsche; now I sawFreud's psychology as, so to speak, an adroit move on the part ofintellectual history , compensating for Nietzsche's deification of thepower principle. The problem had obviously to be rephrased not as"Freud versus Adler" but "Freud versus Nietzsche." It was therefore,I thought, more than a domestic quarrel in the domain ofpsychopathology. The idea dawned on me that Eros and the powerdrive might be in a sense like the dissident sons of a single father,or the products of a single motivating psychic force whichmanifested itself empirically in opposing forms, like positive andnegative electrical charges, Eros as a patiens, the power drive asan agens, and vice versa. Eros makes just as great demands uponthe power drive as the latter upon the former. Where is the onedrive without the other? On the one hand man succumbs to thedrive; on the other hand, he tries to master it. Freud shows how theobject succumbs to the drive, and Adler how man uses the drive inorder to force his will upon the object. Nietzsche, helpless in thehands of his destiny, had to create a "superman" for himself. Freud,I concluded, must himself be so profoundly affected by the power ofEros that he actually wished to elevate it into a dogma--aereperennius--like a religious numen. It is no secret that "Zarathustra"is the proclaimer of a gospel, and here was Freud also trying tooutdo the church and to canonize a theory. T o be sure, he did notdo this too loudly; instead, he suspected me of wanting to be aprophet. He made his tragic claim and demolished it at the same

time; That is how people usually behave with numinosities, andrightly so, for in one respect they are true, in another untrue.Numinous experience elevates and humiliates simultaneously; IfFreud had given somewhat more consideration to thepsychological truth that sexuality is numinous--both a god and devil--he would not have remained bound within the confines of abiological concept. And Nietzsche might not have been carried overthe brink of the world by his intellectual excesses if he had only heldmore firmly to the foundations of human existence.Wherever the psyche is set violently oscillating by a numinousexperience, there is a danger that the thread by which one hangsmay be torn. Should that happen, one man tumbles into an absoluteaffirmation, another into an equally absolute negation. Nirdvandva(freedom from opposites) is the Orient's remedy for this. I have notforgotten that. The pendulum of the mind oscillates between senseand nonsense, not between right an wrong. The numinosum isdangerous because it lures men extremes, so that a modest truth isregarded as the truth and a minor mistake is equated with fatalerror. T out passe--yesterday's truth is today's deception, andyesterday's false inference may be tomorrow's revelation. This isparticularly so in pschological matters, of which, if truth were told,we still know very little. We are still a long way from understandingwhat signifies that nothing has any existence unless some small--and oh, so transitory--consciousness has become aware of it.My conversation with Freud had shown me that he feared that thenuminous light of his sexual insights might be extinguished by a"black tide of mud." Thus a mythological situation had arisen: thestruggle between light and darkness. That explains its numinosity,and why Freud immediately fell back on his dogma as a religiousmeans of defense. In my next book, Wandungen und Symbole derLibido,[5] which dealt with the hero's struggle for freedom, Freud'scurious reaction prompted me to investigate further this archetypal

theme and its mythological background.What with the sexual interpretation on the one hand and the powerdrive of dogma on the other I was led, over the years, to giveconsideration of the problem of typology. It was necessary to studythe polarity and dynamics of the psyche. And I also embarked uponan investigation extending over several decades of "the black tideof mud of occultism"--that is to say, I tried to understand theconscious and unconscious historical assumptions underlying ourcontemporary psychology.It interested me to hear Freud's views on precognition and onparapsychology in general. When I visited him in Vienna in 1909 Iasked him what he thought of these matters. Because of hismaterialistic prejudice, he rejected this entire complex of questionsas nonsensical, and did so in terms of so shallow a positivism that Ihad difficulty in checking the sharp retort on the tip of my tongue. Itwas some years before he recognized the seriousness ofparapsychology and acknowledged the factuality of "occult"phenomena.While Freud was going on this way, I had a curious sensation. Itwas as if my diaphragm were made of iron and were becomingred-hot--a glowing vault. And at that moment there was such a loudreport in the bookcase, which stood right next to us, that we bothstarted up in alarm, fearing the thing was going to topple over on us.I said to Freud: "There, that is an example of a so-called catalyticexteriorization phenomenon."Oh come," he exclaimed. "That is sheer bosh.""It is not," I replied. "Y ou are mistaken, Herr Professor. And to provemy point I now predict that in a moment there will be another suchloud report!" Sure enough, no sooner had I said the words than the

same detonation went off in the bookcase,5 Published in 1912; English trans.; Psychology of the Unconscious (1917).Rev.edn., Symbole der Wandlung (1952); English trans.: Symbols ofTransformation (CW 5. 1956)To  t hi s  d a y I d o  no t  k no w wha t  g a ve  m e  t hi s  c e r t a i nt y.  B ut  I k ne wbeyond all doubt that the report would come again. Freud onlystared aghast at me. I do not know what was in his mind, or what hislook meant. In any case, this incident aroused his mistrust of me,and I had the feeling that I had done something against him. I neverafterward discussed the incident with him.[6]The year 1909 proved decisive for our relationship. I had beeninvited to lecture on the association experiment at Clark Universityin Worcester, Massachusetts. Independently , Freud had alsoreceived an invitation, and we decided to travel together. We met inBremen, where Ferenczi joined us. In Bremen the much-discussedincident of Freud's fainting fit occurred. It was provoked--indirectly--by my interest in the "peat-bog corpses." I knew that in certaindistricts of Northern Germany; these so-called bog corpses were tobe found. They are the bodies of prehistoric men who eitherdrowned in the marshes or were buried there. The bog water inwhich the bodies lie contains humic acid, which consumes thebones and simultaneously tans the skin, so that it and the hair areperfectly preserved. In essence this is a process of naturalmummification, in the course of which the bodies are pressed flatby the weight of the peat. Such remains are occasionally turned upby peat diggers in Holstein, Denmark, and Sweden.Having read about these peat-bog corpses, I recalled them whenwe were in Bremen, but, being a bit muddled, confused them withthe mummies in the lead cellars of the city. This interest of mine goton Freud's nerves. "Why are you so concerned with these

corpses?" he asked me several times. He was inordinately vexedby the whole thing and during one such conversation, while we werehaving dinner together, he sudden fainted. Afterward he said to methat he was convinced that all this chatter about corpses meant Ihad death--wishes toward him. I was more than surprised by thisinterpretation. I was alarmed by the intensity of his fantasies--sostrong that, obviously, they could cause him to faint.In a similar connection Freud once more suffered a fainting6 For Freud's reaction to the incident, see Appendix I, pp. 361-63.7 See Appendix II, pp. 365-68.fit in my presence. This was during the Psychoanalytic Congress inMunich in 1912. Someone had turned the conversation toAmenophis IV (Ikhnaton). The point was made that as a result of hisnegative attitude toward his father he had destroyed his father'scartouches on the steles, and that at the back of his great creationof a monotheistic religion there lurked a father complex. This sort ofthing irritated me, and I attempted to argue that Amenophis hadbeen a creative and profoundly religious person whose acts couldnot be explained by personal resistances toward his father. On thecontrary, I said, he had held the memory of his father in honor, andhis zeal for destruction had been directed only against the name ofthe god Amon, which he had everywhere annihilated; it was alsochiseled out of the cartouches of his father Amon-hotep. Moreover,other pharaohs had replaced the names of their actual or divineforefathers on monuments and statues by their own, feeling that theyhad a right to do so since they were incarnations of the same god.Ye t  t he y,  I p o i nt e d  o ut ,  ha d  i na ug ur a t e d  ne i t he r  a  ne w s t yle  no r  anew religion.At that moment Freud slid off his chair in a faint. Everyone clusteredhelplessly around him. I picked him up, carried him into the next

room, and laid him on a sofa. As I was carrying him, he half cameto, and I shall never forget the look he cast at me. In his weaknesshe looked at me as if I were his father. Whatever other causes mayhave contributed to this faint--the atmosphere was very tense--thefantasy of father-murder was common to both cases.At the time Freud frequently made allusions indicating that heregarded me as his successor. These hints were embarrassing tome, for I knew that I would never be able to uphold his viewsproperly, that is to say, as he intended them. On the other hand Ihad not yet succeeded in working out my criticisms in such amanner that they would carry any weight with him, and my respectfor him was too great for me to want to force him to come finally togrips with my own ideas.--I was by no means charmed by thethought of being burdened, virtually over my own head, with theleadership of a party. In the first place that sort of thing was not inmy nature; in the second place I could not sacrifice my intellectualindependence; and in the third place such luster was highlyunwelcome to me since it would only deflect me from my real aims. Iwas concerned with investigating truth, not with questions ofpersonal prestige.The trip to the United States which began in Bremen in 1909 lastedfor seven weeks. We were together every day, and analyzed eachother's dreams. At the time I had a number of important ones, butFreud could make nothing of them. I did not regard that as anyreflection upon him, for it sometimes happens to the best analystthat he is unable to unlock the riddle of a dream. It was a humanfailure, and I would never have wanted to discontinue our dreamanalyses on that account. On the contrary, they meant a great dealto me, and I found our relationship exceedingly valuable. I regardedFreud as an older, more mature and experienced personality, andfelt like a son in that respect. But then something happened whichproved to be a severe blow to the whole relationship.

Freud had a dream--I would not think it right to air the problem itinvolved. I interpreted it as best I could, but added that a great dealmore could be said about it if he would supply me with someadditional details from his private life. Freud's response to thesewords was a curious look--a look of the utmost suspicion. Then hesaid, "But I cannot risk my authority!" At that moment he lost italtogether. That sentence burned itself into my memory; and in it theend of our relationship was already foreshadowed. Freud wasplacing personal authority above truth.As I have already said, Freud was able to interpret the dreams Iwas then having only incompletely or not at all. They were dreamswith collective contents, containing, a great deal of symbolicmaterial. One in particular was important to me, for it led me for thefirst time to the concept of the "collective unconscious" and thusformed a kind of prelude to my book, Wendlungen and Symbole derLibido.[8]This was the dream. I was in a house I did not know, which had twostories. It was "my house." I found myself in the upper8 Psychology of the Unconscious; rev . edn.: Symbols of Transformation(CW 5).story, where there was a kind of salon furnished with fine old Piecesin rococo style. On the walls hung a number of precious oldpaintings. I wondered that this should be my house, and thought,"Not bad." But then it occtured to me that I did not know what thelower floor looked like. Descending the stairs, I reached the groundfloor. There everything was much older, and I realized that this partof the house must date from about the fifteenth or sixteenth century.The furnishings were medieval; the floors were of red brick.Everywhere it was rather dark. I went from one room to another,

thinking, "Now I really must explore the whole house." I came upon aheavy door, and opened it. Beyond it, I discovered a stone stairwaythat led down into the cellar. Descending again, I found myself in abeautifully vaulted room which looked exceedingly ancient.Examining the walls, I discovered layers of brick among theordinary stone blocks, and chips of brick in the mortar. As soon as Isaw this I knew that the walls dated from Roman times. My interestby now was intense. I looked more closely at the floor. It was ofstone slabs, and in one of these I discovered a ring. When I pulledit, the stone slab lifted, and again I saw a stairway of narrow stonesteps leading down into the depths. These, too, I descended, andentered a low cave cut into the rock. Thick dust lay on the floor, andin the dust were scattered bones and broken pottery , like remainsof a primitive culture. I discovered two human skulls, obviously veryold and half disintegrated. Then I awoke.What chiefly interested Freud in this dream were the two skulls. Hereturned to them repeatedly, and urged me to find a wish inconnection with them. What did I think about these skulls? Andwhose were they? I knew perfectly well, of course, what he wasdriving at: that secret death-wishes were concealed in the dream."But what does he really expect of me?" I thought to myself. T owardwhom would I have death wishes? I felt violent resistance to anysuch interpretation. I also had some intimation of what the dreammight really mean. But I did not then trust my own judgment, andwanted to hear Freud's opinion. I wanted to leam from him.Therefore I submitted to his intention and said, "My wife and mysister-in-law"--after all, I had to name someone whose death wasworth the wishing!I was newly married at the time and knew perfectly well that therewas nothing within myself which pointed to such wishes. But I wouldnot have been able to present to Freud my own ideas on aninterpretation of the dream without encountering incomprehension

and vehement resistance. I did not feel up to quarreling with him,and I also feared that I might lose friendship if I insisted on my ownpoint of view. On the other, hand, I wanted to know what he wouldmake of my answer, and what his reaction would be if I deceivedhim by saying something that suited his theories. And so I told him alie.I was quite aware that my conduct was not above reproach, but a laguerre, comme a la guerre! It would have been impossible for me toafford him any insight into my mental world. The gulf between it andhis was too great. In fact Freud seemed greatly relieved by myreply. I saw from this that he was completely helpless in dealing withcertain kinds of dreams and had to take refuge in his doctrine. Irealized that it was up to me to find out the real meaning of thedream.It was plain to me that the house represented a kind of image of thepsyche--that is to say, of my then state of consciousness, withhitherto unconscious additions. Consciousness was represented bythe salon. It had an inhabited atmosphere, in spite of its antiquatedstyle.The ground floor stood for the first level of the unconscious. Thedeeper I went, the more alien and the darker the scene came. In thecave, I discovered remains of a primitive culture, that is, the world ofthe primitive man within myself--a world which can scarcely bereached or illuminated by consciousness. The primitive psyche ofman borders on the life of the animal soul, just as the caves ofprehistoric times were usually inhabit by animals before men laidclaim to them.During this period I became aware of how keenly I felt the differencebetween Freud's intellectual attitude and mine. I had grown up in theintensely historical atmosphere of Basel at the end of the nineteenth

century, and had acquired, thanks reading the old philosophers,some knowledge of the history of Psychology. When I thought aboutdreams and the contents of the unconscious, I never did so withoutmaking historical comparisons; in my student days I always usedKrug's old dictionary of philosophy . I was especially familiar with thewriters of the eighteenth and early nineteenth century. Theirs wasthe world which had formed the atmosphere of my first-story salon.By contrast, I had the impression that Freud's intellectual historybegan with Buchner, Moleschott, Du Bois-Reymond, and Darwin.The dream pointed out that there were further reaches to the stateof consciousness I have just described: the long uninhabited groundfloor in medieval style, then the Roman cellar, and finally theprehistoric cave. These signified past times and passed stages ofconsciousness.Certain questions had been much on my mind during the dayspreceding this dream. They were: On what premises is Freudianpsychology founded? T o what category of human thought does itbelong? What is the relationship of its almost exclusive personalismto general historical assumptions? My dream was giving me theanswer. It obviously pointed to the foundations of cultural history--ahistory of successive layers of consciousness. My dream thusconstituted a kind of structural diagram of the human psyche; itpostulated something of an altogether impersonal nature underlyingthat psyche. It "clicked," as the English have it--and the dreambecame for me a guiding image which in the days to come was tobe corroborated to an extent I could not at first suspect. It was myfirst inkling of a collective a priori beneath the personal psyche. ThisI first took to be the traces of earlier modes of functioning. Later,with increasing experience and on the basis of more reliableknowledge, I recognized them as forms of instinct, that is, asarchetypes.

I was never able to agree with Freud that the dream is a "facade"behind which its meaning lies hidden--a meaning already known butmaliciously, so to speak, withheld from consciousness. T o medreams are a part of nature, which harbors no intentian to deceive,but expresses something as best it can, just as a plant grows or ananimal seeks its food as best it can. These forms of life, too, haveno wish to deceive our eyes, but we may deceive ourselvesbecause our eyes are shortsighted. Or we hear amiss because ourears are rather deaf--but it is not our ears that wish to deceive us.Long before I met Freud I regarded the unconscious, and dreams,which are its direct exponents, as natural processes to which noarbitrariness can be attributed and above all no legerdemain. Iknew no reasons for the assumption that the tricks ofconsciousness can be extended to the natural processes of theunconscious. On the contrary, daily experience taught me whatintense resistance the unconscious experience opposes to thetendencies of the conscious mind.The dream of the house had a curious effect upon me: it revived myold interest in archaeology. After I had returned to Zurich I took up abook on Babylonian excavations, and read various works on myths.In the course of this reading I came across Friedrich Creuzer'sSymbolik und Mythologie der alten Volker[9]--and that fired me. Iread like mad, and worked with feverish interest through a mountainof mythological material then through the Gnostic writers, andended in total confusion. I found myself in a state of perplexitysimilar to the one I had experienced at the clinic when I tried tounderstand the meaning of psychotic states of mind. It was as if Iwere in an imaginary madhouse and were beginning to treat andanalyze all the centaurs, nymphs, gods, and goddesses inCreuzer's book as though they were my patients. While thusoccupied I could not help but discover the close relationshipbetween ancient mythology and the psychology of primitives, and

this led me to an intensive study of the latter.In the midst of these studies I came upon the fantasies of a youngAmerican altogether unknown to me, Miss Miller. The material hadbeen published by my revered and fatherly friend, ThéodoreFlournoy, in the Archives de Psychologie (Geneva- I wasimmediately struck by the mythological character of the fantasies.9 The Symbolism and Mythology of Ancient Peoples (Leipzig andDarmstadt, 1810-23).They operated like a catalyst upon the stored-up and still disorderlyideas within me. Gradually , there formed out of them, and out of theknowledge of myths I had acquired, my book Wandlungen undSymbole der Libido.While I was working on this book, I had dreams which presaged theforthcoming break with Freud. One of the most significant had itsscene in a mountainous region on the Swiss-Austrian border. It wastoward evening, and I saw an elderly man in the uniform of anImperial Austrian customs official. He walked past, somewhatstooped, without paying any attention to me. His expression waspeevish, rather melancholic and vexed. There were other personspresent, and someone informed me that the old man was not reallythere, but was the ghost of a customs official who had died yearsago. "He is one of those who still couldn't die properly." That wasthe first part of the dream.I set about analyzing this dream. In connection with "customs" I atonce thought of the word "censorship." In connection with "border" Ithought of the border between consciousness and the unconsciouson the one hand, and between Freud's views and mine on the other.The extremely rigorous customs examination at the border seemedto me an allusion to analysis. At a border suitcases are opened and

examined for contraband. In the course of this examination,unconscious assumptions are discovered. As for the old customsofficial, his work had obviously brought him so little that waspleasurable and satisfactory that he took a sour view of the world. Icould not refuse to see the analogy with Freud.At that time Freud had lost much of his authority for me. But he stillmeant to me a superior personality, upon whom I projected thefather, and at the time of the dream this projection was still far fromeliminated. Where such a projection occurs, we are no longerobjective; we persist in a state of divided judgment. On the onehand we are dependent, and on the other we have resistances.When the dream took place I still thought highly of Freud, but at thesame time I was critical of him. This divided attitude is a sign that Iwas still unconscious of the situation and had not come to anyresolution of it. This characteristic of all projections. The dreamurged upon me the necessity of clarifying this situation.Under the impress of Freud's personality I had, as far as possible,cast aside my own judgments and repressed my criticisms. Thatwas the prerequisite for collaborating with him. I had told myself,"Freud is far wiser and more experienced than you. For the presentyou must simply listen to what he says and learn from him. And then,to my own surprise, I found myself dreaming of him as a peevishofficial of the Imperial Austrian monarchy, as a defunct and stillwalking ghost of a custom inspector. Could that be the death-wishwhich Freud had insinuated I felt toward him? I could find no part ofmyself that normally might have had such a wish, for I wanted at allcosts to be able to work with Freud, and, in a frankly egotisticmanner, to partake of his wealth of experience. His friendshipmeant a great deal to me. I had no reason for wishing him dead.But it was possible that the dream could be regarded as acorrective, as a compensation or antidote for my conscious highopinion and admiration. Therefore the dream recommended a

rather more critical attitude toward Freud. I was distinctly shockedby it, although the final sentence of the dream seemed to me anallusion to Freud's potential immortality.The dream had not reached its end with the episode the customsofficial; after a hiatus came a second and far more remarkable part.I was in an Italian city, and it was around noon, between twelve andone o'clock. A fierce sun was beating down upon the narrowstreets. The city was built on hills and reminded me of a particularpart of Basel, the Kohlenberg. The little streets which lead down intothe valley, the Birsigtal, that runs through the city, are partly flights ofsteps. In the dream one such stairway descended to Barfusserplatz.The city was Basel, and yet it was also an Italian city, something likeBergamo. It was summertime; the blazing sun stood at the zenith,and everything was bathed in an intense light. A crowd camestreaming toward me, and I knew that the shops were closing andpeople were on their way home to dinner. In the midst of this streamof people walked a knight in full armor. He mounted the stepstoward me. He wore a helmet of the kind that is called a basinet,with eye slits, and chain armor. Over this was a white tunic intowhich was woven, front and back, a large red cross.One can easily imagine how I felt: suddenly to see in a modern city,during the noonday rush hour, a crusader coming toward me. Whatstruck me as particularly odd was that none of the many personswalking about seemed to notice him. No one turned his head orgazed after him. It was as though he were completely invisible toeveryone but me. I asked myself what this apparition meant, andthen it was as if someone answered me--but there was no onethere to speak: "Y es, this is a regular apparition. The knight alwayspasses by here between twelve and one o'clock, and has beendoing so for a very long time [for centuries, I gathered] andeveryone knows about it."

The knight and the customs oflicial were contrasting figures. Thecustoms official was shadowy, someone who "still couldn't dieproperly"--a fading apparition. The knight, on the other hand, wasfull of life and completely real. The second part of the dream wasnuminous in the extreme, whereas the scene on the border hadbeen prosaic and in itself not impressive; I had been struck only bymy reflections upon it.In the period following these dreams I did a great deal of thinkingabout the mysterious figure of the knight. But it was only much later,after I had been meditating on the dream for a long time, that I wasable to get some idea of its meaning. Even in the dream, I knewthat the knight belonged to the twelfth century. That was the periodwhen alchemy was beginning and also the quest for the Holy Grail.The stories of the Grail had been of the greatest importance to meever since I read them, at the age of fifteen, for the first time. I hadan inkling that a great secret still lay hidden behind those stories.Therefore it seemed quite natural to me that the dream shouldconjure up the world of the Knights of the Grail and their quest--forthat was, in the deepest sense, my own world, which had scarcelyanything to do with Freud's. My whole being was seeklng forsomething still unknown which might confer meaning upon thebanality of life.To  m e  i t  wa s  a  p r o f o und  d i s a p p o i nt m e nt  t ha t  a l l  t he  e f f o r t s  o f  t heprobing mind had apparently succeeded in finding nothing more inthe depths of the psyche than the all too familiar and "all-too-human"limitations. I had grown up in the country, among peasants, andwhat I was unable to learn in the stables I found out from theRabelaisian wit and the untrammeled fantasies of our peasantfolklore. Incest and perversions were no remarkable novelties tome, and did not call for any special explanation. Along withcriminality, they formed part of the black lees that spoiled the tasteof life by showing me only too plainly the ugliness and

meaninglessness of human existence. That cabbages thrive indung was something I had always taken for granted. In all honesty Icould discover no helpful insight in such knowledge. "It's just that allof those people are city folks who know nothing about nature andthe human stable," I thought, sick and tired of these ugly matters.People who know nothing about nature are of course neurotic, forthey are not adapted to reality. They are too naive like children, andit is necessary to tell them the facts of life, so to speak--to make itplain to them that they are human beings like all others. Not thatsuch enlightenment will cure neurotics; they can only regain theirhealth when they climb up out the mud of the commonplace. Butthey are only too fond of lingering in what they have earlierrepressed. How are they ever to emerge if analysis does not makethem aware of something different and better, when even theoryholds them fast in it and offers them nothing more than the rationalor "reasonable injunction to abandon such childishness? That isprecisely what they cannot do, and how should they be able to ifthey do not discover something to stand on? One form of life cannotsimply be abandoned unless it is exchanged for another. As for arational approach to life, that is, as experience shows, impossable,especially when a person is by nature as unreasonable as aneurotic.I now realized why Freud's personal psychology was of suchburning interest to me. I was eager to know the truth about a"reasonable solution," and I was prepared to sacrifice a good dealin order to obtain the answer. Now I felt that I was on the track of it.Freud himself had a neurosis, no doubt diagnosable and one withhighly troublesome symptoms, as I had discovered on our voyageto America. Of course he had taught me that everybody issomewhat neurotic, and that we must practice tolerance. But I wasnot at all inclined to content myself with that; rather, I wanted to knowhow one could escape having a neurosis. Apparently neither Freud

nor his disciples could understand what it meant for the theory andpractice of psychoanalysis if not even the master could deal with hisown neurosis. When, then, Freud announced his intention ofidentifying theory and method and making them into some kind ofdogma, I could no longer collaborate with him; there remained nochoice for me but to withdraw.When I was working on my book about the libido and approachingthe end of the chapter "The Sacrifce," I knew in advance that itspublication would cost me my friendship with Freud. For I plannedto set down in it my own conception of incest, the decisivetransformation of the concept of libido, and various other ideas inwhich I differed from Freud. To me incest signified a personalcomplication only in the rarest cases. Usually incest has a highlyreligious aspect, for which reason the incest theme plays a decisivepart in almost all cosmogonies and in numerous myths. But Freudclung to the literal interpretation of it and could not grasp thespiritual significance of incest as a symbol. I knew that he wouldnever be able to accept any of my ideas on this subject.I spoke with my wife about this, and told her of my fears. Sheattempted to reassure me, for she thought that Freud wouldmagnanimously raise no objections, although he might not acceptmy views. I myself was convinced that he could not do so. For twomonths I was unable to touch my pen, so tormented was I by theconflict. Should I keep my thoughts to myself, or should I risk theloss of so important a friendship? At last I resolved to go ahead withthe writing--and it did indeed cost me Freud's friendship.After the break with Freud, all my friends and acquaintancesdropped away. My book was declared to be rubbish; I was amystic, and that settled the matter. Riklin and Maeder alone stuckby me. But I had foreseen my isolation and harbored no illusionabout the reactions of my so-called friends. That was a point I had

thoroughly considered beforehand. I had known that everything wasat stake, and that I had to take a stand for my convictions. I realizedthat the chapter, "The Sacrifice,"* meant my own sacrifice. Havingreached this insight, I was able to write again, even though I knewthat my ideas would go uncomprehended.In retrospect I can say that I alone logically pursued the twoproblems which most interested Freud: the problem of "archaicvestiges," and that of sexuality. It is a widespread error to imaginethat I do not see the value of sexuality. On the contrary, it plays alarge part in my psychology as an essential--though not the soIe--expression of psychic wholeness. But my main concern has been toinvestigate, over and above its personal significance and biologicalfunction, its spiritual aspect and its numinous meaning, and thus toexplain what Freud was so fascinated by but was unable to grasp.My thoughts on this subject are contained in "The Psychology of theTransference" and the Mysteri um Coni uncti oni s.[11] Sexuali ty i s ofthe greatest importance as the expression of the chthonic spirit.That spirit is the "other face of God," the dark side of the God-image. The question of the chthonic spirit has occupied me eversince I began to delve into the world of alchemy. Basically, thisinterest was awakened by that early conversation with Freud, whenmystified, I felt how deeply stirred he was by the phenomenon ofsexuality.Freud's greatest achievement probably consisted in neuroticpatients seriously and entering into their peculiar individualpsychology. He had the courage to let the case material speak foritself, and in this way was able to penetrate into the real psychologyof his patients. He saw with the patient's eyes so to speak, and soreached a deeper understanding of mental illness than had hithertobeen possible. In this respect he was free of bias, courageous, andsucceeded in overcoming a host of prejudices.

10 In The Practice of Psychotherapy; (CW 16). 11 CW 14.Like an Old T estament prophet, he undertook to overthrow falsegods, to rip the veils away from a mass of dishonesties andhypocrisies, mercilessly exposing the rottenness of thecontemporary psyche. He did not falter in the face of theunpopularity such an enterprise entailed. The impetus which hegave to our civilization sprang from his discovery of an avenue tothe unconscious. By evaluating dreams as the most importantsource of information concerning the unconscious processes, hegave back to mankind a tool that had seemed irretrievably lost. Hedemonstrated empirically the presence of an unconscious psychewhich had hitherto existed only as a philosophical postulate, inparticular in the philosophies of C. G. Carus and Eduard vonHartmann.It may well be said that the contemporary cultural consciousnesshas not yet absorbed into its general philosophy the idea of theunconscious and all that it means, despite the fact that modern manhas been confronted with this idea for more than half a century. Theassimilation of the fundamental insight that psychic life has twopoles still remains a task for the future.

VIConfrontation with theUnconsciousAfter the parting of the ways with Freud, a period of inneruncertainty began for me. It would be no exaggeration to call it astate of disorientation. I felt totally suspended in mid-air, for I hadnot yet found my own footing. Above all, I felt it necessary to developa new attitude toward my patients. I resolved for the present not tobring any theoretical premises to bear upon them, but to wait andsee what they would tell of their own accord. My aim became toleave things to chance. The result was that the patients wouldspontaneously report their dreams and fantasies to me, and I wouldmerely ask, "What occurs to you in connection with that?" or, "Howdo you mean that, where does that come from, what do you thinkabout it?" The interpretations seemed to follow of their own accordfrom the patients' replies and associations. I avoided all theoreticalpoints of view and simply helped the patients to understand thedream-images by themselves, without application of rules andtheories.Soon I realized that it was right to take the dreams in this way as thebasis of interpretation, for that is how dreams are intended. Theyare the facts from which we must proceed. Naturally, the aspectsresulting from this method were so multitudinous that the need for acriterion grew more and more pressing--the need, I might almostput it, for some initial orientation.

About this time I experienced a moment of unusual clarity in which Ilooked back over the way I had traveled so far. I thought, "Now youpossess a key to mythology and are free to unlock all the gates ofthe unconscious psyche." But then something whispered within me,"Why open all gatesl'" And promptly the question arose of what,after all, I had accomplished. I had explained the myths of peoplesof the past; I had written a book about the hero, the myth in whichman has always lived. But in what myth does man live nowadays? Inthe Christian myth, the answer might be, "Do you live in it?" I askedmyself. T o be honest, the answer was no. For me, it is not what I liveby." "Then do we no longer have any myth?" "No, evidently we nolonger have any myth." "But then what is your myth--the myth inwhich you do live?" At this point the dialogue with myself becameuncomfortable, and I stopped thinking. I had reached a dead end.Then, around Christmas of 1912, I had a dream. In the dream Ifound myself in a magnificent Italian loggia with pillars, a marblefloor, and a marble balustrade. I was sitting on a gold Renaissancechair; in front of me was a table of rare beauty. It was made ofgreen stone, like emerald. There I sat, looking out into the distance,for the loggia was set high up on the tower of a castle. My childrenwere sitting at the table too.Suddenly a white bird descended, a small sea gull or a dove.Gracefully, it came to rest on the table, and I signed to the childrento be still so that they would not frighten away the pretty white bird.Immediately, the dove was transformed into a little girl, about eightyears of age, with golden blond hair. She ran off with the childrenand played with them among the colonnades of the castle.I remained lost in thought, musing about what I had justexperienced. The little girl returned and tenderly placed her armsaround my neck. Then she suddenly vanished; the dove was backand spoke slowly in a human voice. "Only in the first hours of the

night can I transform myself into a human being; while the maledove is busy with the twelve dead." Then she flew off into the blueair, and I awoke.l was greatly stirred. What business would a male dove having withtwelve dead people? In connection with the emerald table the storyof the T abula Smaragdina occurred to the emerald table in thealchemical legend of Hermes Trismegistos. He was said to haveleft behind him a table upon which the basic tenets of alchemicalwisdom were engraved in Greek.I also thought of the twelve apostles, the twelve months the year, thesigns of the zodiac, etc. But I could find no solution to the enigma.Finally I had to give it up. All I knew with any certainty was that thedream indicated an unusual activation of the unconscious. But Iknew no technique whereby I might get to the bottom of my innerprocesses, and so there remained nothing for me to do but wait, goon with my life, and pay close attention to my fantasies.One fantasy kept returning: there was something dead present, butit was also still alive. For example, corpses were placed incrematory ovens, but were then discovered to be still living. Thesefantasies came to a head and were simultaneously solved in adream.I was in a region like the Alyscamps near Arles. There they have alane of sarcophagi which go back to Merovingian times. In thedream I was coming from the city, and saw before me a similar lanewith a long row of tombs. They were pedestals with stone slabs onwhich the dead lay. They reminded me of old church burial vaults,where knights in armor lie out- stretched. Thus the dead lay in mydream, in their antique clothes, with hands clasped, the differencebeing that they were not hewn out of stone, but in a curious fashionmummified. I stood still in front of the first grave and looked at the

dead in who was a person of the eighteen-thirties. I looked at hisclothing with interest, whereupon he suddenly moved and came tolife. He unclasped his hands; but that was only because I waslooking at him. I had an extremely unpleasant feeling, but walked onand came to another body. He belonged to the eighteenth century.There exactly the same thing happened: when I looked at him, hecame to life and moved his hands. So I went down the whole row,until I came to the twelfth century--that is, to a crusader in chain mailwho lay there with clasped hands. His figure seemed carved out ofwood. For a long time I looked at him and thought he was reallydead. But suddenly I saw that a finger of his left hand was beginningto stir gently.Of course I had originally held to Freud's view that vestiges of oldexperiences exist in the unconscious. But dreams like this, and myactual experiences of the unconscious, taught me that suchcontents are not dead, outmoded forms, but belong to our livingbeing. My work had confirmed this assumption, and in the course ofyears there developed from it the theory of archetypes.The dreams, however, could not help me over my feeling ofdisorientation. On the contrary, I lived as if under constant innerpressure. At times this became so strong that I suspected therewas some psychic disturbance in myself. Therefore I twice wentover all the details of my entire life, with particular attention tochildhood memories; for I thought there might be something in mypast which I could not see and which might possibly be the cause ofthe disturbance. But this retrospection led to nothing but a freshacknowledgment of my own ignorance. Thereupon I said to myself,"Since I know nothing at all, I shall simply do whatever occurs tome." Thus I consciously submitted myself to the impulses of theunconscious.The first thing that came to the surface was a childhood memory

from perhaps my tenth or eleventh year. At that time I had had aspell of playing passionately with building blocks. I distinctly recalledhow I had built little houses and castles, using bottles to form thesides of gates and vaults. Somewhat later I had used ordinarystones, with mud for mortar. These structures had fascinated me fora long time. T o my astonishment, this memory was accompaniedby a good deal of emotion. "Aha," I1 Freud speaks of "archaic vestiges."said to myself, "there is still life in these things. The small boy is stillaround, and possesses a creative life which I lack. But how can Imake my way to it?" For as a grown man it seemed impossible tome that I should be able to bridge the distance from the presentback to my eleventh year. Y et if I wanted to re-establish contact withthat period, I had no choice but to return to it and take up once morethat child's life with his childish games. This moment was a turningpoint in my fate, but I gave in only after endless resistances and witha sense of resignation. For it was a painfully humiliating experienceto realize that there was nothing to be done except play childishgames. Nevertheless, I began accumulating suitable stones,gathering them partly from the lake shore and partly from the water.And I started building: cottages, a castle, a whole village. Thechurch was still missing, so I made a square building with ahexagonal drum on top of it, and a dome. A church also requires analtar, but I hesitated to build that.Preoccupied with the question of how I could approach this task, Iwas walking along the lake as usual one day, picking stones out ofthe gravel on the shore. Suddenly I caught sight of a red stone, afour-sided pyramid about an inch and a half high. It was a fragmentof stone which had been polished into this shape by the action ofthe water--a pure product of chance. I knew at once: this was the

altar. I placed it in the middle under the dome, and as I did so, Irecalled the underground phallus of my childhood dream. Thisconnection gave me a feeling of satisfaction.I went on with my building game after the noon meal every day,whenever the weather permitted. As soon as I was through eating, Ibegan playing, and continued to do so until the patients arrived; andif I was finished with my work early enough in the evening, I wentback to building. In the course of this activity my thoughts clarified,and I was able to grasp the fantasies whose presence in myself Idimly felt.Naturally, I thought about the significance of what I was doing, andasked myself, "Now, really, what are you about? Y ou are building asmall town, and doing it as if it were a rite!" I had no answer to myquestion, only the inner certainty that I was on the way todiscovering my own myth. For the building game was only abeginning. It released a stream of fantasies which I later carefullywrote down.This sort of thing has been consistent with me, and at any time inmy later life when I came up against a blank wall, I painted a pictureor hewed stone. Each such experience proved to be a rite d'entréefor the ideas and works that followed hard upon it it. Everything that Ihave written this year " and last year, "The Undiscovered Self,""Flying Saucers: A Modern Myth," "A Psychological View ofConscience," has grown out of the the sculptures I did after mywife's death? The close of her life, the end, and what it made merealize, wrenched me violently out of myself. It cost me a great dealto regain my footing and contact with stone helped me.To wa r d  t he  a ut um n o f  1 9 1 3  t he  p r e s s ur e  whi c h I ha d  f e l t  wa s  i n m eseemed to be moving outward, as though there were something inthe air. The atmosphere actually seemed to me darker than it had

been. It was as though the sense of oppression no longer sprangexclusively from a psychic situation, but from concrete reality. Thisfeeling grew more and more intense.In October, while I was alone on a journey, I was suddenly seized byan overpowering vision: I saw a monstrous flood covering all thenorthern and low-lying lands between the North Sea and the Alps.When it came up to Switzerland I saw that in the mountains grewhigher and higher to protect our country. I realized that a frightfulcatastrophe was in progress. I saw the mighty yellow waves, thefloating rubble of civilization, and the drowned bodies of uncountedthousands. Then the whole sea turned to blood. This vision lastedabout one hour. I was perplexed and nauseated, and ashamed ofmy weakness.Two weeks passed; then the vi si on recurred, under the sameconditions, even more vividly than before, and the blood wasemphasized. An inner voice spoke. "Look at it well; it is wholly realand it will be so. Y ou cannot doubt it." That winter someone askedme what I thought were the political prospects of the world in thenear future. I replied that I had no thoughts on the matter, but that Isaw rivers of blood.I asked myself whether these visions pointed to a revolution, butcould not really imagine anything of the sort. And so I drew theconclusion that they had to do with me myself, and decided that Iwas menaced by a psychosis. The idea of war did not occur to meat all.Soon afterward, in the spring and early summer of 1914, I had athrice-repeated dream that in the middle of summer an Arctic coldwave descended and froze the land to ice. I saw, for example, thewhole of Lorraine and its canals frozen and the entire region totallydeserted by human beings. All living green things were killed by

frost. This dream came in April and May, and for the last time inJune, 1914.In the third dream frightful cold had again descended from out of thecosmos. This dream, however, had an unexpected end. Therestood a leaf-bearing tree, but without fruit (my tree of life, I thought),whose leaves had been transformed by the effects of the frost intosweet grapes full of healing juices. I plucked the grapes and gavethem to a large, waiting crowd.At the end of July 1914 I was invited by the British MedicalAssociation to deliver a lecture, "On the Importance of theUnconscious in Psychopathology? at a congress in Aberdeen. Iwas prepared for something to happen, for such visions anddreams are fateful. In my state of mind just then, with the fears--thatwere pursuing me, it seemed fateful to me that I should have to talkon the importance of the unconscious at such a time!On August 1 the world war broke out. Now my task was clear: I hadto try to understand what had happened and to what extent my ownexperience coincided with that of mankind in general. Therefore myfirst obligation was to probe the depths of my own psyche. I made abeginning by writing down the fantasies which had come to meduring my building game. This work took precedence overeverything else.An incessant stream of fantasies had been released, and I did mybest not to lose my head but to find some way to understand thesestrange things. I stood helpless before an alien world; everything init seemed difficult and incomprehensible. I was living in a constantstate of tension; often I felt as if gigantic blocks of stone weretumbling down upon me. One thunderstorm followed another. Myenduring these storms was a question of brute strength. Othershave been shattered by them--Nietzsche, and Holderlin, and many

others. But there was a demonic strength in me, and from thebeginning there was no doubt in my mind that I must find themeaning of what I was experiencing in these fantasies. When Iendured these assaults of the unconscious I had an unswervingconviction that I was obeying a higher will, and that feelingcontinued to uphold me til I had mastered the task.I was frequently so wrought up that I had to do certain yogaexercises in order to hold my emotions in check. But since it wasmy purpose to know what was going on within myself, l would dothese exercises only until I had calmed myself enough to resume mywork with the unconscious. As soon as I had the feeling that I wasmyself again, I abandoned this restraint upon the emotions andallowed the images and inner voices to speak afresh. The Indian,on the other hand, does yoga exercises in order to obliteratecompletely the multitude of psychic contents and images.To  t he  e xt e nt  t ha t  I m a na g e d  t o  t r a ns l a t e  t he  e m o t i o ns  i nt o  i m a g e s - -that is to say, to find the images which were concealed in theemotions--I was inwardly calmed and reassured. Had I left thoseimages hidden in the emotions, I might have been torn to pieces bythem. There is a chance that l might have succeded in splitting themoff; but in that case I would inexorably have fallen into a neurosisand so been ultimately destroyed by them anyhow. As a result of myexperiment I learned how helpful it can be, from the therapeuticpoint of view, to find the particular images which lie behindemotions.I wrote down the fantasies as well as I could, and made an earnesteffort to analyze the psychic conditions under which they had arisen.But I was able to do this only in clumsy language. First I formulatedthe things as I had observed them, usually in "high-flown language,"for that corresponds to the style of the archetypes. Archetypesspeak the language of high rhetoric, even of bombast. It is a style I

find embarrassing; it grates on my nerves, as when someone drawshis nails down a plaster wall, or scrapes his knife against a plate.But since I did not know what was going on, I had no choice but towrite everything down in the style selected by the unconscious itself.Sometimes it was as if I were hearing it with my ears, sometimesfeeling it with my mouth, as if my tongue were formulating words;now and then I heard myself whispering aloud. Below the thresholdof consciousness everything was seething with life.From the beginning I had conceived my voluntary confrontation withthe unconscious as a scientific experiment which I myself wasconducting and in whose outcome I was vitally interested. T oday Imight equally well say that it was an experiment which was beingconducted on me. One of the greatest difficulties for me lay indealing with my negative feelings. I was voluntarily submitting myselfto emotions of which I could not really approve, and I was writingdown fantasies which often struck me as nonsense, and towardwhich I had strong resistances. For as long as we do notunderstand their meaning, such fantasies are a diabolical mixture ofthe sublime and the ridiculous. It cost me a great deal to undergothem, but I had been challenged by fate. Only by extreme effort was Ifinally able to escape from the labyrinth.In order to grasp the fantasies which were stirring in me"underground," I knew that I had to let myself plummet down intothem, as it were. I felt not only violent resistance to this, but a distinctfear. For I was afraid of losing command of myself and becoming aprey to the fantasies--and as a psychiatrist I realized only too wellwhat that meant. After prolonged hesitation, however, I saw thatthere was no other way out. I had to take the chance, had to try togain power over them; for I realized that if I did not do so, I ran therisk of their gaining power over me. A cogent motive for my makingthe attempt was the conviction that I could not expect of my patientssomething I did not dare to do myself. The excuse that a helper

stood at their side would not pass muster, for I was well aware thatthe so-called helper--that is, myseIf--could not help them unless heknew their fantasy material from his own direct experience, and thatat present all he possessed were a few theoretical prejudices ofdubious value. This idea--that I was committing myself to adangerous enterprise not for myself alone, but also for the sake ofmy patients--helped me over several critical phases.It was during Advent of the year 1913--December 12, to be exact--that I resolved upon the decisive step. I was sitting at my desk oncemore, thinking over my fears. Then I let myself drop. Suddenly it wasas though the ground literally gave way at my feet, and I plungeddown into dark depths. I could not fend off a feeling of panic. Butthen, abruptly, at not too great a depth, I landed on my feet in a soft,sticky mass. I felt great relief, although I was apparently in completedarkness. After a while my eyes grew accustomed to the gloom,which was rather like a deep twilight. Before me was the entranceto a dark cave, in which stood a dwarf with a leathery skin, as if hewere mummified. I squeezed past him through the narrow entranceand waded knee deep through icy water to the other end in the cavewhere, on a projecting rock, I saw a glowing red crystal. I graspedthe stone, lifted it, and discovered a hollow underneath. At first Icould make out nothing, but then I saw that there was running water.In it a corpse floated by, a youth with blond hair and a wound in thehead. He was followed by a gigantic black scarab and then by ared, newborn sun, rising up out of the depths of the water. Dazzledby the light, I wanted to replace the stone upon the opening, but thena fluid welled out. It was blood. A thick jet of it leaped up, and I feltnauseated. It seemed to me that the blood continued to spurt for anunendurably long time. At last it ceased, and the vision came to anend.I was stunned by this vision. I realized, of course, that it was a hero

and solar myth, a drama of death and renewal, the rebirthsymbolized by the Egyptian scarab. At the end, the dawn of the newday should have followed, but instead came that intolerableoutpouring of blood--an altogether abnormal phenomenon, so itseemed to me. But then I recalled the vision of blood that I had hadin the autumn of that same year, and I abandoned all further attemptto understand.Six days later (December 18, 1913), I had the following dream. Iwas with an unknown, brown-skinned man, a savage, I in a lonely ,rocky mountain landscape. It was before dawn; the eastern sky wasalready bright, and the stars fading. Then I heard Siegfried's hornsounding over the mountains and I knew that we had to kill him. Wewere armed with rifles and lay in wait for him on a narrow path overthe rocks.Then Siegfried appeared high up on the crest of the mountain, inthe first ray of the rising sun. On a chariot made of the bones of thedead he drove at furious speed down the precipitous slope. Whenhe turned a corner, we shot at him, and he plunged down, struckdead.Filled with disgust and remorse for having destroyed something sogreat and beautiful, I turned to flee, impelled by the fear that themurder might be discovered. But a tremendous downfall of rainbegan, and I knew that it would wipe out all traces of the dead. I hadescaped the danger of discovery; life could go on, but anunbearable feeling of guilt remained.When I awoke from the dream, I turned it over in my mind but wasunable to understand it. I tried therefore to fall asleep again, but avoice within me said, "You must understand the dream, and mustdo so at once!" The inner urgency mounted until the terrible momentcame when the voice said, "If you do not understand the dream, you

must shoot yourself!" In a drawer of my night table lay a loadedrevolver, and I became frightened. Then I began pondering onceagain, and suddenly the meaning of the dream dawned on me."Why , that is the problem that is being played out in the world."Siegfried, I thought, represents what the Germans want to achieve,heroically to impose their will, have their own way. "Where there is awill there is a way!" I had wanted to do the same. But now that wasno longer possible. The dream showed that the attitude embodiedby Siegfried, the hero, no longer suited me. Therefore it had to bekilled.After the deed I felt an overpowering compassion, as though Imyself had been shot: a sign of my secret identity with Siegfried, aswell as of the grief a man feels when he is forced to sacrifice hisideal and his conscious attitudes. This identity and my heroicidealism had to be abandoned, for there are higher things than theego's will, and to these one must bow.These thoughts sufficed for the present, and I fell asleep again. Thesmall, brown-skinned savage who accompanied me and hadactually taken the initiative in the killing was an embodiment of theprimitive shadow. The rain showed that the tension betweenconsciousness and the unconscious was being resolved. Althoughat the time I was not able to understand the meaning of the dreambeyond these few hints, new forces were released in me whichhelped me to carry the experiment with the unconscious to aconclusion.In order to seize hold of the fantasies, I frequently imagined a steepdescent. I even made several attempts to get to the very bottom.The first time I reached, as it were, a depth of about a thousandfeet; the next time I found myself at the edge of a cosmic abyss. Itwas like a voyage to the moon, or a descent into empty space. Firstcame the image of a crater, and I had the feeling that I was in the

land of the dead. The atmosphere was that of the other world. Nearthe steep slope of a rock I caught sight of two figures, an old manwith a white beard and a beautiful young girl. I summoned up mycourage and approached them as though they were real people,and listened attentively to what they told me. The old man explainedthat he was Elijah, and that gave me a shock. But the girl staggeredme even more, for she called herself Salome! She was blind. Whata strange couple: Salome and Elijah. But Elijah assured me that heand Salome had belonged together from all eternity, whichcompletely astounded me... They had a black serpent living withthem which displayed an unmistakable fondness for me. I stuckclose to Elijah because he seemed to be the most reasonable ofthe three, and to have a clear intelligence. Of Salome was distinctlysuspicious. Elijah and I had a long conversation which, however, Idid not understand.Naturally I tried to find a plausible explanation for the appearance ofBiblical figures in my fantasy by reminding myself that my father hadbeen a clergyman. But that really explained nothing at all. For whatdid the old man signify? What did Salome signify? Why were theytogether? Only many years later, when I knew a great deal morethan I knew then, did the connection between the old man and theyoung girl appear perfectly natural to me.In such dream wanderings one frequently encounters an old manwho is accompanied by a young girl, and examples of such couplesare to be found in many mythic tales. Thus, according to Gnostictradition, Simon Magus went about with a young girl whom he hadpicked up in a brothel. Her name was Helen, and she was regardedas the reincarnation of the Trojan Helen. Klingsor and Kundry, Lao-tzu and the dancing girl, likewise belong to this category.I have mentioned that there was a third figure in my fantasy besidesElijah and Salome: the large black snake. In myths the snake is a

frequent counterpart of the hero. There are numerous accounts oftheir affinity. For example, the hero has eyes like a snake, or afterhis death he is changed into a snake and revered as such, or thesnake is his mother, etc. In my fantasy, therefore, the presence ofthe snake was an indication of a hero-myth. Salome is an animafigure. She is blind because she does not see the meaning ofthings. Elijah is the figure of the wise old prophet and represents thefactor of intelligence and knowledge; Salome, the erotic element.One might say that the two figures are personifications of Logosand Eros. But such a definition would be excessively intellectual. Itis more meaningful to let the figures be what they were for me at thetime--namely,--events and experiences.Soon after this fantasy another figure rose out of the unconscious.He developed out of the Elijah figure. I called him Philemon.Philemon was a pagan and brought with him an Egypto-Hellenisticatmosphere with a Gnostic coloration. His figure first appeared tome in the following dream.There was a blue sky, like the sea, covered not by clouds but by flatbrown clods of earth. It looked as if the clods were breaking apartand the blue water of the sea were becoming visible between them.But the water was the blue sky . Suddenly there appeared from theright a winged being sailing across the sky. I saw that it was an oldman with the horns of a bull. He held a bunch of four keys, one ofwhich he clutched as if he were about to open a lock. He had thewings of the kingfisher with its characteristic colors.Since I did not understand this dream-image, I painted it in order toimpress it upon my memory . During the days when I was occupiedwith the painting, I found in my garden, by the lake shore, a deadkingfisher! I was thunderstruck, for king- fishers are quite rare in thevicinity of Zurich and I have never since found a dead one. The bodywas recently dead--at the most, two or three days-and showed no

external injuries.Philemon and other figures of my fantasies brought home to me thecrucial insight that there are things in the psyche which I do notproduce, but which produce themselves and have their own life.Philemon represented a force which was not myself. In my fantasiesI held conversations with him, and he said things which I had notconsciously thought. For I observed clearly that it was he whospoke, not I. He said I treated thoughts as if I generated themmyself, but in his view thoughts were like animals in the forest, orpeople in a room, or birds in the air, and added, "If you should seepeople in a room, you would not think that you had made thosepeople, or that you were responsible for them." It was he who taughtme psychic objectivity, the reality of the psyche. Through him thedistinction was clarified between myself and the object of mythought. He confronted me in an objective manner, and I understoodthat there is something in me which can say things that I do notknow and do not intend, things which may even be directed againstme.Psychologically , Philemon represented superior insight. He was amysterious figure to me. At times he seemed to me quite real, as ifhe were a living personality. I went walking up and down the gardenwith him, and to me he was what the Indians Call a guru.Whenever the outlines of a new personification appeared, I felt italmost as a personal defeat. It meant: "Here is something else youdidn't know until now!" Fear crept over me that the succession ofsuch figures might be endless, that I might lose myself in bottomlessabysses of ignorance. My ego felt devalued--although thesuccesses I had been having in worldly affair might have reassuredme. In my darknesses (horridas nostrae mentis purga tenebras--"cleanse the horrible darknesses of mind"--the Aurora Consurgens[4] says) I could have wished for nothing better than a real, live guru,

someone possessing superior knowledge and ability, who wouldhave disentangled for me the involuntary creations of myimagination. This task undertaken by the figure of Philemon, whomin this respect I had wiIly-nilly to recognize as my psychagogue. Andthe fact was that he conveyed to me many an illuminating idea.More than fifteen years later a highly cultivated elderly Indian visitedme, a friend of Gandhi's, and we talked about Indian education--inparticular, about the relationship between guru and chela. Ihesitantly asked him whether he could tell me anything about theperson and character of his own guru, whereppon he replied in amatter-of-fact tone, "Oh yes, he was shankaracharya.""Y ou don't mean the commentator on the Vedas who died centuriesago?" I asked."Yes, I mean him," he said, to my amazement."Then you are referring to a spirit?" I asked."Of course it was his spirit," he agreed.At that moment I thought of Philemon."There are ghostly gurus too," he added. "Most people have livinggurus. But there are always some who have a spirit for teacher."This information was both illuminating and reassuring to me.Evidently , then, I had not plummeted right out of the human world,but had only experienced the sort of thing that could happen toothers who made similar efforts.Later, Philemon became relativized by the emergence of yetanother figure, whom I called Ka. In ancient Egypt the "king's ka"was his earthly form, the embodied soul. In my fantasy the ka-soul

came from below, out of the earth as if out of a deep shaft. I did apainting of him, showing him in his earth-bound form, as a hermwith base of stone and upper part of bronze.4 An alchemical treatise ascribed to Thomas Aquinas.High up in the painting appears a kingfisher's wing, and between itand the head of Ka floats a round, glowing nebula of Stars. Ka'sexpression has something demonic about it--one might also say,Mephistophelian. In one hand he holds something like a coloredpagoda, or a reliquary, and in the other a stylus with which he isworking on the reliquary. He is saying, "l am he who buries the godsin gold and gems."Philemon had a lame foot, but was a winged spirit, whereas Karepresented a kind of earth demon or metal demon. Philemon wasthe spiritual aspect, or "meaning." Ka, on the other hand, was aspirit of nature like the Anthroparion of Greek alchemy--with whichat the time I was still unfamiliar? Ka was he who made everythingreal, but who also obscured the halcyon spirit, Meaning, or replacedit by beauty, the "eternal reflection."In time I was able to integrate both figures through the study ofalchemy.When I was writing down these fantasies, I once asked myself,"What am I really doing? Certainly this has nothing to do withscience. But then what is it?" Whereupon a voice within me said, "Itis art." I was astonished. It had never entered my head that what Iwas writing had any connection with art. Then I thought, "Perhapsmy unconscious is forming a personality that is not me, but which isinsisting on coming through to expression." I knew for a certaintythat the voice had come from a woman. I recognized it as the voiceof a patient, a talented psychopath who had a strong transference

to me. She had become a living ligure within my mind.Obviously what I was doing wasn't science. What then could it bebut art? It was as though these were the only alternatives in theworld. That is the way a woman's mind works. I said veryemphatically to this voice that my fantasies had5 The Anthroparion is a tiny man, a kind of homunculus. He is found, forexample, in the visions of Zosimos of Panopolis, an important alchemist ofthe third century. T o the group which includes the Anthroparion belong thegnomes, the Dactyls of Classical antiquity, and the homunculi of thealchemists. As the spirit of quick-silver, the alchemical Mercurius was alsoan Anthroparion.--A. J.nothing to do with art, and I felt a great inner resistance. No voicecame through, however, and I kept on writing. Then came the nextassault, and again the same assertion: "That is art." This time Icaught her and said, "No, it is not art! On the contrary, it is nature,"and prepared myself for an argument. When nothing of the sortoccurred, I reflected that the "woman within me" did not have thespeech centers I had. And so I suggested that she use mine. Shedid so and came through with a long statement.I was greatly intrigued by the fact that a woman should interfere withme from within. My conclusion was that she must be the "souI," inthe primitive sense, and I began to speculate on the reasons whythe name "anima" was given to the soul. Why was it thought of asfeminine? Later I came to see that this inner feminine figure plays atypical, or archetypal, role in the unconscious of a man, and I calledher the "anima." The corresponding figure in the unconscious ofwoman I called the "animus."At first it was the negative aspect of the anima that most impressedme. I felt a little awed by her. It was like the feeling of an invisiblepresence in the room. Then a new idea came to me: in putting

down all this material for analysis I was in effect writing letters to theanima, that is, to a part of myself with a different viewpoint from myconscious one. I got remarks of an unusual and unexpectedcharacter. I was like a patient in analysis with a ghost and a woman!Every evening I wrote very conscientiously , for I thought if I did notwrite, there would be no way for the anima to get at my fantasies.Also, by writing them out I gave her no chance to twist them intointrigues. There is a tremendous difference between intending totell something and actually telling it. In order to be as honest aspossible with myself, I wrote everything down very carefully,following the old Greek maxim: "Give away all that thou hast, thenshalt thou receive."Often, as I was writing, I would have peculiar reactions that threwme off. Slowly I learned to distinguish between myself and theinterruption. When something emotionally vulgar or banal came up, Iwould say to myself, "It is perfectly true that I have thought and feltthis way at some time or other, but I don't have to think and feel thatway now. I need not accept this banality of mine in perpetuity; that isan unnecessary humiliation."The essential thing is to differentiate oneself from theseunconscious contents by personifying them, and at the same time tobring them into relationship with consciousness. That is thetechnique for stripping them of their power. It is not too difficult topersonify them, as they always possess a certain degree ofautonomy, a separate identity of their own. Their autonomy is amost uncomfortable thing to reconcile oneself to, and yet the veryfact that the unconscious presents itself in that way gives us thebest means of handling it.What the anima said seemed to me full of a deep cunning. If I hadtaken these fantasies of the unconscious as art, they would havecarried no more conviction than visual perceptions, as if I were

watching a movie. I would have felt no moral obligation towardthem. The anima might then have easily seduced me into believingthat I was a misunderstood artist, and that my so-called artisticnature gave me the right to neglect reality. If I had followed hervoice, she would in all probability have said to me one day, "Do youimagine the nonsense you're engaged in is really art? Not a bit."Thus the insinuations of the anima, the mouthpiece of theunconscious, can utterly destroy a man. In the final analysis thedecisive factor is always consciousness, which can understand themanifestations of the unconscious and take up a position towardthem.But the anima has a positive aspect as well. It is she whocommunicates the images of the unconscious to the consciousmind, and that is what I chiefly valued her for. For decades I alwaysturned to the anima when I felt that my emotional behavior wasdisturbed, and that something had been constellated in theunconscious. I would then ask the anima: "Now what are you up to?What do you see? I should like to know." After some resistance sheregularly produced an image. As soon as the image was there, theunrest or the sense of oppression vanished. The whole energy ofthese emotions was transformed into interest in and curiosity aboutthe image. I would speak with the anima about the images shecommunicated to me, for I had to try to understand them as best Icould, just like a dream.To d a y I no  l o ng e r  ne e d  t he s e  c o nve r s a t i o ns  wi t h t he  a ni m a ,  f o r  I nolonger have such emotions. But if I did have them, I would deal withthem in the same way. T oday I am directly conscious of the anima'sideas because I have learned to accept the contents of theunconscious and to understand them. I know how I must behavetoward the inner images. I can read their meaning directly from mydreams, and therefore no longer need a mediator to communicatethem.

I wrote these fantasies down first in the Black Book; later, Itransferred them to the Red Book, which I also embellished withdrawings? It contains most of my mandala drawings. In the RedBook I tried an esthetic elaboration of my fantasies, but neverfinished it. I became aware that I had not yet found the rightlanguage, that I still had to translate it into something else.Therefore I gave up this estheticizing tendency in good time, infavor of a rigorous process of understanding. I saw that I so muchfantasy needed firm ground underfoot, and that I must first returnwholly to reality. For me, reality meant scientific comprehension. Ihad to draw concrete conclusions from the insights the unconscioushad given me--and that task was to become a life work.It is of course ironical that I, a psychiatrist, should at almost everystep of my experiment have run into the same psychic materialwhich is the stuff of psychosis and is found in the insane. This is thefund of unconscious images which fatally confuse the mentalpatient. But it is also the matrix of a mythopoeic imagination whichhas vanished from our rational age. Though such imagination ispresent everywhere, it is both tabooed and dreaded, so that it evenappears to be a risky experiment or a questionable adventure toentrust oneself to the uncertain path that leads into the depths of theunconscious. It is considered the path of error, of equivocation andmisunderstanding. I am reminded of Goethe's words: "Now let medare to open wide the6 The Black Book consists of six blackbound, smallish leather notebooks.The Red Book, a folio volume bound in red leather, contains the samefantasies couched in elaborately literary form and language, and set down incalligraphic Gothic script, in the manner of mediev al manuscripts.--A. J.gate / Past which men's steps have ever flinching trod."[7] Thesecond part of Faust, too, was more than a literary exercise. It is a

link in the Aurea Catena [8] which has existed from the beginningsof philosophical alchemy and Gnosticism down to Nietzsche'sZarathustra. Unpopular, ambiguous, and dangerous, it is a voyageof discovery to the other pole of the world. Particularly at this time,when I was working on the fantasies, I needed a point of support in"this world," and I may say that my family and my professional workwere that to me. It was most essential for me to have a normal life inthe real world as a counterpoise to that strange inner world. Myfamily and my profession remained the base to which I could alwaysreturn, assuring me that I was an actually existing, ordinary person.The unconscious contents could have driven me out of my wits. Butmy family, and the knowledge: I have a medical diploma from aSwiss university , I must help my patients, I have a wife and fivechildren, I live at 228 Seestrasse in Kusnacht--these wereactualities which made demands upon me and proved to me againand again that I really existed, that I was not a blank page whirlingabout in the winds of the spirit, like Nietzsche. Nietzsche had lostthe ground under his feet because he possessed nothing more thanthe inner world of his thoughts--which incidentally possessed himmore than he it. He was uprooted and hovered above the earth, andtherefore he succumbed to exaggeration and irreality. For me, suchirreality was the quintessence of horror, for I aimed, after all, at thisworld and this life. No matter how deeply absorbed or how blownabout I was, I always knew that everything I was experiencing wasultimately directed at this real life of mine. I meant to meet itsobligations and fulfill its meanings. My watchword was: Hic Rhodus,hic salta!Thus my family and my profession always remained a joyful realityand a guarantee that I also had a normal existence. Very graduallythe outlines of an inner change began making their appearancewithin me. In 1916 I felt an urge to give shape7 Faust, Part One.

8 The Golden (or Homeric) Chain in alchemy is the series of great wisemen, beginning with Hermes Trismegistos, which links earth with heaven--A.J.to something. I was compelled from within, as it were, to formulateand express what might have been said by Philemon. This was howthe Septem Sermones ed Mortuos" with its peculiar languagecame into being.It began with a restlessness, but I did not know what it meant orwhat "they" wanted of me. There was an ominous atmosphere allaround me. I had the strange feeling that the air was filled withghostly entities. Then it was as if my house began to be haunted.My eldest daughter saw a white figure passing through the room.My second daughter, independently of her elder sister, related thattwice in the night her blanket had been snatched away; and thatsame night my nine-year-old son had an anxiety dream. In themorning he asked his mother for crayons, and he, who ordinarilynever drew, now made a picture of his dream. He called it "ThePicture of the Fisherman." Through the middle of the picture ran ariver, and a fisherman with a rod was standing on the shore. He hadcaught a fish. On the fisherman's head was a chimney from whichflames were leaping and smoke rising. From the other side of theriver the devil came flying through the air. He was cursing becausehis fish had been stolen. But above the fisherman hovered an angelwho said, "You cannot do anything to him; he only catches the badfish!" My son drew this picture on a Saturday.Around five o'clock in the afternoon on Sunday the front doorbellbegan ringing frantically. It was a bright summer day; the two maidswere in the kitchen, from which the open square outside the frontdoor could be seen. Everyone immediately looked to see who wasthere, but there was no one in sight. I was sitting near the doorbell,and not only heard it but saw it moving. We all simply stared at one

another. The atmosphere was thick, believe mel Then I knew thatsomething had to happen. The whole house was filled as if therewere a crowd present, crammed full of spirits. They were packeddeep right up to the door, and the air was so thick it was scarcelypossible to breathe. As for myself, I was all a-quiver with thequestion: "For God's9 Privately printed (n.d.) and pseudonymously subtitled "The SevenSermons to the Dead written by Basilides in Alexandria, the City where theEast toucheth the West" (see Appendix V).sake, what in the world is this?" Then they cried out in chorus, "Wehave come back from Jerusalem where we found not what wesought." That is the beginning of the Septem Sermones.Then it began to flow out of me, and in the course of three eveningsthe thing was written. As soon as I took up the pen, the wholeghostly assemblage evaporated. The room quieted and theatmosphere cleared. The haunting was over.The experience has to be taken for what it was, or as it seems tohave been. No doubt it was connected with the state of emotion Iwas in at the time, and which was favorable to parapsychologicalphenomena. It was an unconscious constellation whose peculiaratmosphere I recognized as the numen of an archetype. "It walksabroad, it's in the air!"[10] The intellect, of course, would like toarrogate to itself some scientific, physical knowledge of the affair,or, preferably, to write the whole thing off as a violation of the rules.But what a dreary world it would be if the rules were not violatedsometimes!Shortly before this experience I had written down a fantasy of mysoul having flown away from me. This was a significant event: thesoul, the anima, establishes the relationship to the unconscious. In acertain sense this is also a relationship to the collectivity of the

certain sense this is also a relationship to the collectivity of thedead; for the unconscious corresponds to the mythic land of thedead, the land of the ancestors. If, therefore, one has a fantasy ofthe soul vanishing, this means that it has withdrawn into theunconscious or into the land of the dead. There it produces amysterious animation and gives visible form to the ancestral traces,the collective contents. Like a medium, it gives the dead a chanceto manifest themselves. Therefore, soon after the disappearance ofmy soul the "dead" appeared to me, and the result was the SeptemSermones. This is an example of what is called "loss of soul"--aphenomenon encountered quite frequently among primitives.From that time on, the dead have become ever more distinct for meas the voices of the Unanswered, Unresolved, and Unredeemed;for since the questions and demands which my destiny required meto answer did not come to me from outside,10 Faust, Part Two.they must have come from the inner world. These conversationswith the dead formed a kind of prelude to what I had tocommunicate to the world about the unconscious: a kind of patternof order and interpretation of its general contents.When I look back upon it all today and consider what happened tome during the period of my work on the fantasies, it seems asthough a message had come to me with overwhelming force. Therewere things in the images which concerned not only myself butmany others also. It was then that I ceased to belong to myselfalone, ceased to have the right to do so. From then on, my lifebelonged to the generality. The knowledge I was concerned with, orwas seeking, still could not be found in the science of those days. Imyself had to undergo the original experience, and, moreover, try toplant the results of my experience in the soil of reality; otherwisethey would have remained subjective assumptions without validity. It

was then that I dedicated myself to service of the psyche. I loved itand hated it, but it was my greatest wealth. My delivering myselfover to it, as it were, was the only way by which I could endure myexistence and live it as fully as possible.To d a y I c a n s a y t ha t  I ha ve  ne ve r  l o s t  t o uc h wi t h m y i ni t i a lexperiences. All my works, all my creative activity, has come fromthose initial fantasies and dreams which began in 1912, almost fiftyyears ago. Everything that I accomplished in later life was alreadycontained in them, although at first only in the form of emotions andimages.My science was the only way I had of extricating myself from thatchaos. Otherwise the material would have trapped me in its thicket,strangled me like jungle creepers. I took great care to try tounderstand every single image, every item of my psychic inventory,and to classify them scientifically--so far as this was possible--and,above all, to realize them in actual life. That is what we usuallyneglect to do. We allow the images to rise up, and maybe wewonder about them, but that is all. We do not take the trouble tounderstand them, let alone draw ethical conclusions from them. Thisstopping-short conjures up the negative effects of the unconscious.It is equally a grave mistake to think that it is enough to gain someunderstanding of the images and that knowledge can here make ahalt. Insight into them must be converted into an ethical obligation.Not to do so is to fall prey to the power principle, and this producesdangerous effects which are destructive not only to others but evento the knower. The images of the unconscious place a greatresponsibility upon a man. Failure to understand them, or a shirkingof ethical responsibility, deprives him of his wholeness andimposes a painful fragmentariness on his life.In the midst of this period when I was so preoccupied with the

images of the unconscious, I came to the decision to withdraw fromthe university, where I had lectured for eight years as Privatdozent(since 1905). My experience and experiments with the unconscioushad brought my intellectual activity to a standstill. After thecompletion of The Psychology of the Unconscious.[11] I foundmyself utterly incapable of reading a scientific book. This went onfor three years. I felt I could no longer keep up with the world of theintellect, nor would I have been able to talk about what reallypreoccupied me. The material brought to light from the unconscioushad, almost literally, struck me dumb.[12] I could neither understandit nor give it form. At the university I was in an exposed position, andfelt that in order to go on giving courses there I would first have tofind an entirely new and different orientation. It would be unfair tocontinue teaching young students when my own intellectual situationwas nothing but a mass of doubts.I therefore felt that I was confronted with the choice of eithercontinuing my academic career, whose road lay smooth before me,or following the laws of my inner personality, of a higher reason, andforging ahead with this curious task of mine, this experiment inconfrontation with the unconscious. But until it was completed Icould not appear before the public.11 See above, Chap. V, n. 5, p. 155.12 During this "fallow period" Jung wrote very little: a handful of papers inEnglish, and the very important first versions of the essays published inEnglish translation as T wo Essays on Analytical Psychology (CW 7). Theperiod came to an end with the publication of Psychologische Typen in 1921(English trans.; Psychological Types, CW 6.)--A.J.Consciously , deliberately , then, I abandoned my academic career.For I felt that something great was happening to me, and I put mytrust in the thing which I felt to be more important sub specieaeternitatis. I knew that it would fill my life, and for the sake of thatgoal I was ready to take any kind of risk.

What, after all, did it matter whether or not I became a professor?Of course it bothered me to have to give this up; in many respects Iregretted that I could not confine myself to generally understandablematerial. I even had moments when I stormed against destiny. Butemotions of this kind are transitory, and do not count. The otherthing, on the contrary, is important, and if we pay heed to what theinner personality desires and says, the sting vanishes. That issomething I have experienced again and again, not only when Igave up my academic career. Indeed, I had my first experiences ofthis sort as a child. In my youth I was hot-tempered; but wheneverthe emotion had reached its climax, suddenly it swung around andthere followed a cosmic stillness. At such times I was remote fromeverything, and what had only a moment before excited me seemedto belong to a distant past.The consequence of my resolve, and my involvement with thingswhich neither I nor anyone else could understand, was an extremeloneliness. I was going about laden with thoughts of which I couldspeak to no one: they would only have been misunderstood. I feltthe gulf between the external world and the interior world of imagesin its most painful form. I could not yet see that interaction of bothworlds which I now understand. I saw only an irreconcilablecontradiction between "inner" and "outer."However, it was clear to me from the start that I could find contactwith the outer world and with people only if I succeeded in showing--and this would demand the most intensive effort--that the contentsof psychic experience are real, and real not only as my ownpersonal experiences, but as collective experiences which othersalso have. Later I tried to demonstrate this in my scientific work, andI did all in my power to convey to my intimates a new way of seeingthings. I knew that if I did not succeed, I would be condemned toabsolute isolation.

It was only toward the end of the First World War that I graduallybegan to emerge from the darkness. Two events contributed to this.The first was that I broke with the woman who was determined toconvince me that my fantasies had artistic value; the second andprincipal event was that I began to understand mandala drawings.This happened in 1918-19. I had painted the first mandala [13] in1916 after writing the Septem Sermones; naturally I had not, then,understood it.In 1918-19 I was in Chateau d'Oex as Commandant de la RégionAnglaise des Internés de Guerre. While I was there I sketched everymorning in a notebook a small circular drawing, a mandala, whichseemed to correspond to my inner situation at the time. With thehelp of these drawings I could observe my psychic transformationsfrom day to day. One day, for example, I received a letter from thatesthetic lady in which she again stubbornly maintained that thefantasies arising from my unconscious had artistic value and shouldbe considered art. The letter got on my nerves. It was far fromstupid, and therefore dangerously persuasive. The modern artist,after all, seeks to create art out of the unconscious. Theutilitarianism and self-importance concealed behind this thesistouched a doubt in myself, namely, my uncertainty as to whether thefantasies I was producing were really spontaneous and natural, andnot ultimately my own arbitrary inventions. I was by no means freefrom the bigotry and hubris of consciousness which wants tobelieve that any halfway decent inspiration is due to one's ownmerit, whereas inferior reactions come merely by chance, or evenderive from alien sources. Out of this irritation and disharmonywithin myself there proceeded, the following day, a changedmandala: part of the periphery had burst open and the Symmetrywas destroyed.Only gradually did I discover what the mandala really is:

13 Reproduced as the frontispiece to The Archetypes and the CollectiveUnconscious (CW g, 1).-A. J."Formation, Transformation, Eternal Mind's eternal recreation."[14]And that is the self, the wholeness of the personality , which if allgoes well is harmonious, but which cannot tolerate self-deceptions.My mandalas were cryptograms concerning the state of the selfwhich were presented to me anew each day. In them I saw the self--that is, my whole being--actively at work. T o be sure, at first I couldonly dimly understand them; but they seemed to me highlysignificant, and I guarded them like precious pearls. I had thedistinct feeling that they were something central, and in time Iacquired through them a living conception of the self. The self, Ithought, was like the monad which I am, and which is my world. Themandala represents this monad, and corresponds to themicrocosmic nature of the psyche.I no longer know how many mandalas I drew at this time. Therewere a great many. While I was working on them, the questionarose repeatedly: What is this process leading to? Where is itsgoal? From my own experience, I knew by now that I could notpresume to choose a goal which would seem trustworthy to me. Ithad been proved to me that I had to abandon the idea of thesuperordinate position of the ego. After all, I had been brought upshort when I had attempted to maintain it. I had wanted to go on withthe scientific analysis of myths which I had begun in Wandlungenund Symbole. That was still my goal--but I must not think of that! Iwas being compelled to go through this process of theunconscious. I had to let myself be carried along by the current,without a notion of where it would lead me. When I began drawingthe mandalas, however, I saw that everything, all the paths I hadbeen following, all the steps I had taken, were leading back to a

single point--namely, to the mid-point. It became increasingly plainto me that the mandala is the center. It is the exponent of all paths. Itis the path to the center, to individuation.During those years, between 1918 and 1920, I began to understandthat the goal of psychic development is the self. There is no linearevolution; there is only a circumambulation of the self.14 Faust, Part Two, trans. by Philip Wayne (Harmondsworth,England, Penguin Books Ltd., 1959), p. 79.Uniform development exists, at most, only at the beginning; later,everything points toward the center. This insight gave me stability,and gradually my inner peace returned. I knew that in finding themandala as an expression of the self I had attained what was forme the ultimate. Perhaps someone else knows more, but not I.Some years later (in 1927) I obtained confirmation of my ideasabout the center and the self by way of a dream. I represented itsessence in a mandala which I called "Window on Eternity? Thepicture is reproduced in The Secret of the Golden Flower (Fig.3).[15] A year later I painted a second picture, like wise amandala,[16] with a golden castle in the center. When it wasfinished, I asked myself, "Why is this so Chinese?" I was impressedby the form and choice of colors, which seemed to me Chinese,although there was nothing outwardly Chinese about it. Y et that washow it affected me. It was a strange coincidence that shortlyafterward I received a letter from Richard Wilhelm enclosing themanuscript of a Taoist-alchemical treatise entitled The Secret of theGolden Flower, with a request that I write a commentary on it. Idevoured the manuscript at once, for the text gave me undreamed-of confirmation of my ideas about the mandala and thecircumambulation of the center. That was the first event which brokethrough my isolation. I became aware of an affinity; I could establish

ties with something and someone."In remembrance of this coincidence, this "synchronicity," I wroteunderneath the picture which had made so Chinese an impressionupon me: "In 1928, when I was painting this picture, showing thegolden, well-fortified castle, Richard Wilhelm in Frankfurt sent methe thousand-year-old Chinese text on the yellow castle, the germ ofthe immortal body."This is the dream I mentioned earlier: I found myself in a dirty, sootycity. It was night, and winter, and dark, and raining.15 Cf. "Concerning Mandala Symbolism? in The Archetypes and theCollective Unconscious (CW 9, i, ), fig. 6 and pp. 363 ff.16 The Secret of the Golden Flower, Eg. 10. See also "Concerning MandalaSymbolism," fig. 36 and p. 377.17 On Richard Wilhelm, see Appendix IV, pp. 373-77.I was in Liverpool. With a number of Swiss--say, half a dozen--Iwalked through the dark streets. I had the feeling that there we werecoming from the harbor, and that the real city was actually up above,on the cliffs. We climbed up there. It reminded me of Basel, wherethe market is down below and then you go up through theTo t e ng a s s c he n ( " A l l e y o f  t he  D e a d " ) ,  whi c h l e a d s  t o  a  p l a t e a uabove and so to the Petersplatz and the Peterskirche. When wereached the plateau, we found a broad square dimly illuminated bystreet lights, into which many streets converged. The variousquarters of the city were arranged radially around the square. In thecenter was a round pool, and in the middle of it a small island.While everything round about was obscured by rain, fog, smoke,and dimly lit darkness, the little island blazed with sunlight. On itstood a single tree, a magnolia, in a shower of reddish blossoms. Itwas as though the tree stood in the sunlight and were at the sametime the source of light. My companions commented on theabominable weather, and obviously did not see the tree. They

spoke of another Swiss who was living in Liverpool, and expressedsurprise that he should have settled here. I was carried away by thebeauty of the flowering tree and the sunlit island, and thought, "Iknow very well why he has settled here." Then I awoke.On one detail of the dream I must add a supplementary comment:the individual quarters of the city were themselves arranged radiallyaround a central point. This point formed a small open squareilluminated by a larger street lamp, and constituted a small replicaof the island. I knew that the "other Swiss" lived in the vicinity of oneof these secondary centers.This dream represented my situation at the time. I can still see thegrayish-yellow raincoats, glistening with the wetness of the rain.Everything was extremely unpleasant, black and opaque--just as Ifelt then. But I had had a vision of unearthly beauty, and that waswhy I was able to live at all. Liverpool is the "pool of life." The "liver,"according to an old view, is the seat of life--that which "makes tolive."This dream brought with it a sense of finality. I saw that here thegoal had been revealed. One could not go beyond the center. Thecenter is the goal, and everything is directed toward that center.Through this dream I understood that the self is the principle andarchetype of orientation and meaning. Therein lies its healingfunction. For me, this insight signified an approach to the centerand therefore to the goal. Out of it emerged a first inkling of mypersonal myth.After this dream I gave up drawing or painting mandalas. Thedream depicted the climax of the whole process of development ofconsciousness. It satisfied me completely, for it gave a total pictureof my situation. I had known, to be sure, that I was occupied withsomething important, but I still lacked understanding, and there had

been no one among my associates who could have understood.The clarification brought about by the dream made it possible forme to take an objective view of the things that filled my being.Without such a vision I might perhaps have lost my orientation andbeen compelled to abandon my undertaking. But here the meaninghad been made clear. When I parted from Freud, I knew that I wasplunging into the unknown. Beyond Freud, after all, I knew nothing;but I had taken the step into darkness. When that happens, and thensuch a dream comes, one feels it as an act of grace.It has taken me virtually forty-five years to distill within the vessel ofmy scientific work the things I experienced and wrote down at thattime. As a young man my goal had been to accomplish somethingin my science. But then, I hit upon this stream of lava, and the heatof its fires reshaped my life. That was the primal stuff whichcompelled me to work upon it, and my works are a more or lesssuccessful endeavor to incorporate this incandescent matter intothe contemporary picture of the world.The years when I was pursuing my inner images were the mostimportant in my life--in them everything essential was decided. It allbegan then; the later details are only supplements and clarificationsof the material that burst forth from the unconscious, and at firstswamped me. It was the primo materia for a lifetime's work.

VII

The WorkAS MY LIFE entered its second half, I was already embarked on theconfrontation with the contents of the unconscious. My work on thiswas an extremely long-drawn-out affair, and it was only after sometwenty years of it that I reached some degree of understanding ofmy fantasies.First I had to find evidence for the historical prefiguration of my innerexperiences. That is to say, I had to ask myself, "Where have myparticular premises already occurred in history?" If I had notsucceeded in finding such evidence, I would never have been ableto substantiate my ideas. Therefore, my encounter with alchemywas decisive for me, as it provided me with the historical basiswhich I had hitherto lacked.Analytical psychology is fundamentally a natural science, but it issubject far more than any other science to the personal bias of theobserver. The psychologist must depend therefore in the highestdegree upon historical and literary parallels if he wishes to excludeat least the crudest errors in judgment. Between 1918 and 1926 Ihad seriously studied the Gnostic writers, for they too had beenconfronted with the primal world of the unconscious and had dealtwith its contents, with images that were obviously contaminated withthe world of instinct. Just how they understood these imagesremains difficult to say, in view of the paucity of the accounts which,moreover, mostly stem from their opponents, the Church Fathers. Itseems to me highly unlikely that they had a psychologicalconception of them. But the Gnostics were too remote for me toestablish any link with them in regard to the questions that were

confronting me. As far as I could see, the tradition that might haveconnected Gnosis with the present seemed to have been severed,and for a long time it proved impossible to find any bridge that ledfrom Gnosticism or neo-Platonism to the contemporary world. Butwhen I began to understand alchemy I realized that it representedthe historical link with Gnosticism, and that a continuity thereforeexisted between past and present. Grounded in the naturalphilosophy of the Middle Ages, alchemy formed the bridge on theone hand into the past, to Gnosticism, and on the other into thefuture, to the modern psychology of the unconscious.This had been inaugurated by Freud, who had introduced alongwith it the classical Gnostic motifs of sexuality and the wickedpaternal authority. The motif of the Gnostic Y ahweh and Creator-God reappeared in the Freudian myth of the primal father and thegloomy superego deriving from that father. In Freud's myth hebecame a daemon who created a world of disappointments,illusions, and suffering. But the materialistic trend which had alreadycome to light in the alchemists' preoccupation with the secrets ofmatter had the effect of obscuring for Freud that other essentialaspect of Gnosticism: the primordial image of the spirit as another,higher god who gave to mankind the krater (mixing vessel), thevessel of spiritual transformation.[1] The krater is a feminineprinciple which could find no place in Freud's patriarchal world.Incidentally, he is by no means alone in this prejudice, In the realmof Catholic1 In the writings of Poimandres, a pagan Gnostic, the footer was a vesselfilled with spirit, which the Creator-god sent down to earth so that those whostrov e for higher consciousness might be baptized in it. It was a kind ofuterus of spiritual renewal and rebirth, and corresponded to the alchemical'vas' in which the transformation of substances took place. The parallel tothis in Jung's psychology is the inner transformation process known asindividuation (see glossary). A. J.

thought the Mother of God and Bride of Christ has been receivedinto the divine thalamus (bridal chamber) only recently , aftercenturies of hesitancy, and thus at least been accorded partialrecognition.[2] But in the Protestant and Jewish spheres the fathercontinues to dominate as much as ever. In philosophical alchemy,on the other hand, the feminine principle plays a role equal to that ofthe masculine.Before I discovered alchemy , I had a series of dreams whichrepeatedly dealt with the same theme. Beside my house stoodanother, that is to say, another wing or annex, which was strange tome. Each time I would wonder in my dream why I did not know thishouse, although it had apparently always been there. Finally came adream in which I reached the other wing. I discovered there awonderful library, dating largely from the sixteenth and seventeenthcenturies. Large, fat folio volumes, bound in pigskin, stood alongthe walls. Among them were a number of books embellished withcopper engravings of a strange character, and illustrationscontaining curious symbols such as I had never seen before. At thetime I did not know to what they referred; only much later did Irecognize them as alchemical symbols. In the dream I wasconscious only of the fascination exerted by them and by the entirelibrary. It was a collection of medieval incunabula and sixteenth-century prints.The unknown wing of the house was a part of my personality, anaspect of myself; it represented something that belonged to me butof which I was not yet conscious. It, and especially the library,referred to alchemy, of which I was ignorant, but which I was soon tostudy. Some fifteen years later I had assembled a library very likethe one in the dream.The crucial dream anticipating my encounter with alchemy camearound 1926: I was in the South Tyrol. It was wartime. I was on the

Italian front and driving back from the front line2 This refers to the Papal Bull of Pius XII, Munifcentissimus Deus (1950),promulgating the Assumption of the Blessed Virgin Mary. The new dogmaaffirms that Mary as the Bride is united with the Son in the heavenly bridalchamber, and as Sophia (Wisdom) she is united with the Godhead. Thusthe feminine principle is brought into immediate proximity with themasculine Trinity. Cf. Jung, "Answer to Job," in Psychology and Religion:West and East ( CW 11 ), pp. 458 ff. A. J.with a little man, a peasant, in his horse-drawn wagon. All around usshells were exploding, and I knew that we had to push on as quicklyas possible, for it was very dangerous.[3]We had to cross a bridge and then go through a tunnel whosevaulting had been partially destroyed by the shells. Arriving at theend of the tunnel, we saw before us a sunny landscape, and Irecognized it as the region around Verona. Below me lay the city,radiant in full sunlight. I felt relieved, and we drove on out into thegreen, thriving Lombard plain. The road led through lovelyspringtime countryside; we saw the rice fields, the olive trees, andthe vineyards. Then, diagonally across the road, I caught sight of alarge building, a manor house of grand proportions, rather like thepalace of a North Italian duke. It was a typical manor house withmany annexes and outbuildings. Just as at the Louvre, the road ledthrough a large courtyard and past the palace. The little coachmanand myself drove in through a gate, and from here we could see,through a second gate at the far end, the sunlit landscape again. Ilooked around: to my right was the fagade of the manor house, tomy left the servants' quarters and the stables, barns, and otheroutbuildings, which stretched on for a long way.Just as we reached the middle of the courtyard, in front of the mainentrance, something unexpected happened: with a dull clang, bothgates flew shut. The peasant leaped down from his seat and

exclaimed, "Now we are caught in the seventeenth century."Resignedly I thought, "Well, that's that! But what is there to do aboutit? Now we shall be caught for years." Then the consoling thoughtcame to me: "Someday, years from now, I shall get out again."After this dream I plowed through ponderous tomes on the history ofthe world, of religion, and of philosophy, without finding anything thatcould help me explain the dream. Not3 The shells falling from the sky were, interpreted psychologically, missilescoming from the "other side," They were, therefore, effects emanating fromthe unconscious, from the shadow side of the mind. The happenings in thedream suggested that the war, which in the outer world had taken placesome years before, was not yet over, but was continuing to be fought withinthe psyche. Here, apparently, was to be found the solution of problemswhich could not be found in the outer world. C. G. J.until much later did I realize that it referred to alchemy, for thatscience reached its height in the seventeenth century. Oddlyenough, I had entirely forgotten what Herbert Silberer had writtenabout alchemy.[4] At the time his book was published, I regardedalchemy as something off the beaten track and rather silly, much asI appreciated Silberer's anagogic or constructive point of view. Iwas in correspondence with him at the time and had let him knowhow much I valued his work. As his tragic death shows, Silberer'sdiscovery of the problem was not followed by insight into it.[5] Hehad used in the main late material, which I could make nothing of.The late alchemical texts are fantastic and baroque; only after wehave learned how to interpret them can we recognize whattreasures they hide.Light on the nature of alchemy began to come to me only after I hadread the text of the Golden Flower, that specimen of Chinesealchemy which Richard Wilhelm sent me in 1928. I was stirred bythe desire to become more closely acquainted with the alchemical

texts. I commissioned a Munich bookseller to notify me of anyalchemical books that might fall into his hands. Soon afterward Ireceived the first of them, the Artis Auriferae Volumina Duo (1593),a comprehensive collection of Latin treatises among which are anumber of the "classics" of alchemy.I let this book lie almost untouched for nearly two years.Occasionally I would look at the pictures, and each time I wouldthink, "Good Lord, what nonsense! This stuff is impossible tounderstand." But it persistently intrigued me, and I made up mymind to go into it more thoroughly. The next winter I began, andsoon found it provocative and exciting. T o be sure, the texts stillseemed to me blatant nonsense, but here and there would bepassages that seemed significant to me, and occasionally I evenfound a few sentences which I thought I could understand. Finally Irealized that the alchemists were talking in symbols those oldacquaintances of mine. "Why, this is fantastic," I thought. "I simplymust learn to decipher all this." By now I was4 Problems of Mysticism and Its Symbolism (New York, 1917; Gennanedn., Vienna, 1914). 5 Silberer committed suicide,completely fascinated, and buried myself in the texts as often as Ihad the time. One night, while I was studying them, I suddenlyrecalled the dream that I was caught in the seventeenth century. Atlast I grasped its meaning. "So that's it! Now I am condemned tostudy alchemy from the very beginning."It was a long while before I found my way about in the labyrinth ofalchemical thought processes, for no Ariadne had put a thread intomy hand. Reading the sixteenth-century text, "RosariumPhilosophorum" I noticed that certain strange expressions and turnsof phrase were frequently repeated. For example, "solve et

coagula" "unum vas" "lapis," "prima materia" "Mercurius" etc. I sawthat these expressions were used again and again in a particularsense, but I could not make out what that sense was. I thereforedecided to start a lexicon of key phrases with cross references. Inthe course of time I assembled several thousand such key phrasesand words, and had volumes filled with excerpts. I worked alongphilological lines, as if I were trying to solve the riddle of an unknownlanguage. In this way the alchemical mode of expression graduallyyielded up its meaning. It was a task that kept me absorbed formore than a decade.I had very soon seen that analytical psychology coincided in a mostcurious way with alchemy. The experiences of the alchemists were,in a sense, my experiences, and their world was my world. Thiswas, of course, a momentous discovery: I had stumbled upon thehistorical counterpart of my psychology of the unconscious. Thepossibility of a comparison with alchemy, and the uninterruptedintellectual chain back to Gnosticism, gave substance to mypsychology. When I pored over these old texts everything fell intoplace: the fantasy-images, the empirical material I had gathered inmy practice, and the conclusions I had drawn from it. I now began tounderstand what these psychic contents meant when seen inhistorical perspective. My understanding of their typical character,which had already begun with my investigation of myths, wasdeepened. The primordial images and the nature of the archetypetook a central place in my researches, and it became clear to methat without history there can be no psychology, and certainly nopsychology of the unconscious. A psychology of consciousnesscan, to be sure, content itself with material drawn from personal life,but as soon as we wish to explain a neurosis we require ananamnesis which reaches deeper than the knowledge ofconsciousness. And when in the course of treatment unusualdecisions are called for, dreams occur that need more than

personal memories for their interpretation.I regard my work on alchemy as a sign of my inner relationship toGoethe. Goethe's secret was that he was in the grip of that processof archetypal transformation which has gone on through thecenturies. He regarded his Faust as an opus magnum or divinum.He called it his "main business," and his whole life was enactedwithin the framework of this drama. Thus, what was alive and activewithin him was a living substance, a suprapersonal process, thegreat dream of the mundus archetypus (archetypal world).I myself am haunted by the same dream, and from my eleventh yearI have been launched upon a single enterprise which is my "mainbusiness." My life has been permeated and held together by oneidea and one goal: namely , to penetrate into the secret of thepersonality. Everything can be explained from this central point, andall my works relate to this one theme.My real scientific work began with the association experiment in1903. I regard it as my first scientific work in the sense of anundertaking in the field of natural science. Studies in WordAssociation was followed by two psychiatric papers whose origin Ihave already discussed: "The Psychology of Dementia Praecox"and "The Content of the Psychoses." In 1912 my book Wandlungenund Symbole der Libido was published, and my friendship withFreud came to an end. From then on, I had to make my way alone,I had a starting point in my intense preoccupation with the imagesof my own unconscious. This period lasted from 1913 to 1917; thenthe stream of fantasies ebbed away. Not until it had subsided and Iwas no longer held captive inside the magic mountain was I able totake an objective view of that whole experience and begin to reflectupon it. The first question I asked myself was, "What does one dowith the unconscious?" "The Relations between the Ego and the

Unconscious"[6] was my answer. In Paris I had delivered a lectureon this subject in 1916;[7] it was, however, not published in Germanuntil twelve years later, in greatly expanded form. In it I describedsome of the typical contents of the unconscious, and showed that itis by no means a matter of indifference what attitude the consciousmind takes toward them.Simultaneously , I was busy with preparatory work for PsychologicalTypes, fi rst publi shed i n 1921. Thi s work sprang ori gi nally from myneed to define the ways in which my outlook differed from Freud'sand Adler's. In attempting to answer this question, I came acrossthe problem of types; for it is one's psychological type which fromthe outset determines and limits a person's judgment. My book,therefore, was an effort to deal with the relationship of the individualto the world, to people and things. It discussed the various aspectsof consciousness, the various attitudes the conscious mind mighttake toward the world, and thus constitutes a psychology ofconsciousness regarded from what might be called a clinical angle.I worked a great deal of literature into this book. The writings ofSpitteler occupied a special place, in particular his Prometheusand Epimetheus;[8] but I also discussed Schiller, Nietzsche, and theintellectual history of the classical era and the Middle Ages. I waspresumptuous enough to send a copy of my book to Spitteler. Hedid not answer me, but shortly afterward delivered a lecture in whichhe declared positively that his Prometheus and Epimetheus"meant" nothing, that he might just as well have sung, "Spring iscome, tra-la-la-la-la."The book on types yielded the insight that every judgment made byan individual is conditioned by his personality type and that everypoint of view is necessarily relative. This raised6 In Two Essays on Analytical Psychology (CW 7) . 7 "La Structure de I'inconscient," Archives de psychologie, XVI (Geneva,

1916), 62, 152-79. See CW 7, Appendix 2, "The Structure of theUnconscious." 8 Carl Spitteler (1845-1924) was a Swiss writer whose best-known works,besides Prometheus and Epimetheus, include the epic Der OlympischeFruhling and the novel Imago. In 1919 he was awarded the Nobel Prize forliterature.the question of the unity which must compensate this diversity, andit led me directly to the Chinese concept of T ao. I have alreadyspoken of the interplay between my inner development and RichardWilhelm's sending me a T aoist text. In 1929 he and I collaboratedon The Secret of the Golden Flower. It was only after I had reachedthe central point in my thinking and in my researches, namely, theconcept of the self, that I once more found my way back to theworld. I began delivering lectures and taking a number of journeys.The various essays and lectures formed a kind of counterpoise tothe years of interior searching. They also contained answers to thequestions that were put to me by my readers and patients.[9]A subject with which I had been deeply concerned ever since mybook Wandlungen und Symbole was the theory of the libido. Iconceived the libido as a psychic analogue of physical energy,hence as a more or less quantitative concept, which thereforeshould not be defined in qualitative terms. My idea was to escapefrom the then prevailing concretism of the libido theory in otherwords, I wished no longer to speak of the instincts of hunger,aggression, and sex, but to regard all these phenomena asexpressions of psychic energy.In physics, too, we speak of energy and its various manifestations,such as electricity, light, heat, etc. The situation in psychology isprecisely the same. Here, too, we are dealing primarily with energy,that is to say, with measures of intensity, with greater or lesserquantities. It can appear in various guises. If we conceive of libidoas energy, we can take a comprehensive and unified view.

Qualitative questions as to the nature of the libido whether it besexuality, power, hunger, or something else recede into thebackground. What I wished to do for psychology was to arrive atsome logical and thorough view such as is provided in the physicalsciences by the theory of energetics. This is what I was after in mypaper "On Psychic Energy" (1928). I see man's drives, for example,as various manifestations of energic processes and thus as forcesanalogous to heat, light, etc. Just as it would not occur to themodern physicist to derive all forces from, shall We say, heat alone,so the psychologist should beware of lumping all instincts under theconcept of sexuality. This was Freud's initial error which he latercorrected by his assumption of "ego-instincts." Still later he broughtin the superego, and conferred virtual supremacy upon it.9 These works are distributed mainly among volumes 4, 8, 10, and 16 of theCollected Works.In "The Relations between the Ego and the Unconscious" I haddiscussed only my preoccupation with the unconscious, andsomething of the nature of that preoccupation, but had not yet saidanything much about the unconscious itself. As I worked with myfantasies, I became aware that the unconscious undergoes orproduces change. Only after I had familiarized myself with alchemydid I realize that the unconscious is a process, and that the psycheis transformed or developed by the relationship of the ego to thecontents of the unconscious. In individual cases that transformationcan be read from dreams and fantasies. In collective life it has leftits deposit principally in the various religious systems and theirchanging symbols. Through the study of these collectivetransformation processes and through understanding of alchemicalsymbolism I arrived at the central concept of my psychology: theprocess of individuation.An essential aspect of my work is that it soon began to touch on the

question of one's view of the world, and on the relations betweenpsychology and religion. I went into these matters in detail first in"Psychology and Religion" (1938) and then, as a direct offshoot ofthis, in Paracelsica (1942). The second essay in this book,"Paracelsus as a Spiritual Phenomenon," is of particularimportance from this point of view. The writings of Paracelsuscontain a wealth of original ideas, including clear formulations of thequestions posed by the alchemists, though these are set forth inlate and baroque dress. Through Paracelsus I was finally led todiscuss the nature of alchemy in relation to religion and psychologyor, to put it another way, of alchemy as a form of religiousphilosophy. This I did in Psychology and Alchemy ( 1944). Thus Ihad at last reached the ground which underlay my own experiencesof the years 1913 to 1917; for the process through which I hadpassed at that time corresponded to the process of alchemicaltransformation discussed in that book.It is only natural that I should constantly have revolved in my mind thequestion of the relationship of the symbolism of the unconscious toChristianity as well as to other religions. Not only do I leave the dooropen for the Christian message, but I consider it of centralimportance for Western man. It needs, however, to be seen in anew light, in accordance with the changes wrought by thecontemporary spirit. Otherwise, it stands apart from the times, andhas no effect on man's wholeness. I have endeavored to show thisin my writings. I have given a psychological interpretation of thedogma of the Trinity and of the text of the Mass which, moreover, Icompared with the visions described by Zosimos of Panopolis, athird-century alchemist and Gnostic.[10] My attempt to bringanalytical psychology into relation with Christianity ultimately led tothe question of Christ as a psychological figure. As early as 1944,in Psychology and Alchemy , I had been able to demonstrate theparallelism between the Christ figure and the central concept of the

alchemists, the lapis, or stone.In 1939 I gave a seminar on the Spiritual Exercises of IgnatiusLoyola. At the same time I was occupied on the studies forPsychology and Alchemy . One night I awoke and saw, bathed inbright light at the foot of my bed, the figure of Christ on the Cross. Itwas not quite life-size, but extremely distinct; and I saw that his bodywas made of greenish gold. The vision was marvelously beautiful,and yet I was profoundly shaken by it. A vision as such is nothingunusual for me, for I frequently see extremely vivid hypnagogicimages.I had been thinking a great deal about the Anima Christi, one of themeditations from the Spiritual Exercises. The vision came to me asif to point out that I had overlooked something in iny reflections: theanalogy of Christ with the aurum non vulgi and the viriditas of thealchemists.[11] When I realized that the vision pointed to this centralalchemical symbol, and that10 Both studies are included in Psychology and Religion: West and East (CW 11 )11 The more serious alchemists realized that the purpose of their work wasnot the transmutation of base metals into gold, but the production of anaurum non vulgi ("not the common gold") or aurum philosophicum("philosophical gold"). In other words, they were concerned with spiritualvalues  and t he problem of ps y c hic  t rans format ion.  A.  J.I had had an essentially alchemical vision of Christ, I felt comforted.The green gold is the living quality which the alchemists saw notonly in man but also in inorganic nature. It is an expression of thelife-spirit, the anima mundi or films macrocosmi, the Anthropos whoanimates the whole cosmos. This spirit has poured himself out intoeverything, even into inorganic matter; he is present in metal andstone. My vision was thus a union of the Christ-image with his

analogue in matter, the filius macrocosmi. If I had not been so struckby the greenish-gold, I would have been tempted to assume thatsomething essential was missing from my "Christian" view in otherwords, that my traditional Christ-image was somehow inadequateand that I still had to catch up with part of the Christian development.The emphasis on the metal, however, showed me the undisguisedalchemical conception of Christ as a union of spiritually alive andphysically dead matter.I took up the problem of Christ again in Aion.[12] Here I wasconcerned not with the various historical parallels but with therelation of the Christ figure to psychology. Nor did I see Christ as afigure stripped of all externalities. Rather, I wished to show thedevelopment, extending over the centuries, of the religious contentwhich he represented. It was also important to me to show howChrist could have been astrologically predicted, and how he wasunderstood both in terms of the spirit of his age and in the course oftwo thousand years of Christian civilization. This was what I wantedto portray, together with all the curious marginal glosses which haveaccumulated around him in the course of the centuries.As I delved into all these matters the question of the historicalperson, of Jesus the man, also came up. It is of importancebecause the collective mentality of his time one might also say: thearchetype which was already constellated, the primordial image ofthe Anthropos was condensed in him, an almost unknown Jewishprophet. The ancient idea of the Anthropos, whose roots lie inJewish tradition on the one hand12 English trans., under same title, in 1959 (CW 9, **)and in the Egyptian Horus myth on the other, had taken possessionof the people at the beginning of the Christian era, for it was part ofthe Zeitgeist. It was essentially concerned with the Son of Man,

God's own son, who stood opposed to the deified Augustus, theruler of this world. This idea fastened upon the originally Jewishproblem of the Messiah and made it a world problem.It would be a serious misunderstanding to regard as "merechance'* the fact that Jesus, the carpenter's son, proclaimed thegospel and became the savior of the world. He must have been aperson of singular gifts to have been able so completely to expressand to represent the general, though unconscious, expectations ofhis age. No one else could have been the bearer of such amessage; it was possible only for this particular man Jesus.In those times the omnipresent, crushing power of Rome,embodied in the divine Caesar, had created a world wherecountless individuals, indeed whole peoples, were robbed of theircultural independence and of their spiritual autonomy. Today,individuals and cultures are faced with a similar threat, namely ofbeing swallowed up in the mass. Hence in many places there is awave of hope in a reappearance of Christ, and a visionary rumorhas even arisen which expresses expectations of redemption. Theform it has taken, however, is comparable to nothing in the past, butis a typical child of the "age of technology ." This is the worldwidedistribution of the UFO phenomenon (unidentified flyingobjects).[13]Since my aim was to demonstrate the full extent to which mypsychology corresponded to alchemy or vice versa I wanted todiscover, side by side with the religious questions, what specialproblems of psychotherapy were treated in the work of thealchemists. The main problem of medical psychotherapy is thetransference. In this matter Freud and I were in completeagreement. I was able to demonstrate that alchemy, too, hadsomething that corresponded to the transference-

13 Cf. Flying Saucers: A Modern Myth of Things Seen in the Skies (NewYork and London, 1959); also in Civilization in Transition (CW 10).namely, the concept of the coniunctio, whose pre-eminentimportance had been noted already by Silberer. Evidence for thiscorrespondence is contained in my book, Psychology and Alchemy.Two years later, i n 1946, I pursued the matter further in "Psychologyof the Transference,"[14] and finally my researches led to theMysterium Coniunetionis.As with all problems that concerned me personally or scientifically ,that of the coniunctio was accompanied or heralded by dreams. Inone of these dreams both this and the Christ problem werecondensed in a remarkable image.I dreamed once more that my house had a large wing which I hadnever visited. I resolved to look at it, and finally entered. I came to abig double door. When I opened it, I found myself in a room set upas a laboratory. In front of the window stood a table covered withmany glass vessels and all the paraphernalia of a zoologicallaboratory. This was my father's workroom. However, he was notthere. On shelves along the walls stood hundreds of bottlescontaining every imaginable sort of fish. I was astonished: so nowmy father was going in for ichthyology!As I stood there and looked around I noticed a curtain which belliedout from time to time, as though a strong wind were blowing.Suddenly Hans, a young man from the country , appeared. I told himto look and see whether a window were open in the room behindthe curtain. He went, and was gone for some time. When hereturned, I saw an expression of terror on his face. He said only,"Yes, there is something. It's haunted in there!"Then I myself went, and found a door which led to my mother's

room. There was no one in it. The atmosphere was uncanny. Theroom was very large, and suspended from the ceiling were tworows of five chests each, hanging about two feet above the floor.They looked like small garden pavilions, each about six feet in area,and each containing two beds. I knew that this was the room wheremy mother, who in reality had long been dead, was visited, and thatshe had set up these14 In The Practice of Psychotherapy ( CW 16 ). 15 CW 14.beds for visiting spirits to sleep. They were spirits who came inpairs, ghostly married couples, so to speak, who spent the night oreven the day there.Opposite my mother's room was a door. I opened it and entered avast hall; it reminded me of the lobby of a large hotel. It was fittedout with easy chairs, small tables, pillars, sumptuous hangings, etc.A brass band was playing loudly; I had heard music all along in thebackground, but without knowing where it came from. There was noone in the hall except the brass band blaring forth dance tunes andmarches.The brass band in the hotel lobby suggested ostentatious jollity andworldliness. No one would have guessed that behind this loudfacade was the other world, also located in the same building. Thedream-image of the lobby was, as it were, a caricature of mybonhomie or worldly joviality. But this was only the outside aspect;behind it lay something quite different, which could not beinvestigated in the blare of the band music: the fish laboratory andthe hanging pavilions for spirits. Both were awesome places inwhich a mysterious silence prevailed. In them I had the feeling: Hereis the dwelling of night; whereas the lobby stood for the daylightworld and its superficiality.

The most important images in the dream were the "reception roomfor spirits" and the fish laboratory. The former expresses insomewhat farcial fashion the coniunctio; the latter indicates mypreoccupation with Christ, who himself is the fish (ichthys). Bothwere subjects that were to keep me on the go for more than adecade.It is remarkable that the study of fish was attributed to my father. Inthe dream he was a caretaker of Christian souls, for, according tothe ancient view, these are fish caught in Peter's net. It is equallyremarkable that in the same dream my mother was a guardian ofdeparted spirits. Thus both my parents appeared burdened with theproblem of the "cure of souls," which in fact was really my task.Something had remained unfinished and was still with my parents;that is to say, it was still latent in the unconscious and hencereserved for the future. I was being reminded that I had not yet dealtwith the major concern of "philosophical" alchemy, the coniunctio,and thus had not answered the question which the Christian soul putto me. Also the major work on the Grail legend, which my wife hadmade her life's task, was not completed.[16] I recall how often thequest for the Grail and the fisher king came to my mind while I wasworking on the ichthys symbol in Aion. Had it not been for myunwillingness to intrude upon my wife's field, I would unquestionablyhave had to include the Grail legend in my studies of alchemy.My memory of my father is of a sufferer stricken with an Amfortaswound, a "fisher king" whose wound would not heal that Christiansuffering for which the alchemists sought the panacea. I as a"dumb" Parsifal was the witness of this sickness during the years ofmy boyhood, and, like Parsifal, speech failed me. I had onlyinklings. In actuality my father had never interested himself intheriomorphic Christ-symbolism. On the other hand he had literallylived right up to his death the suffering prefigured and promised by

Christ, without ever becoming aware that this was a consequenceof the imitatio Christi. He regarded his suffering as a personalaffliction for which you might ask a doctor's advice; he did not see itas the suffering of the Christian in general. The words of Galatians2:20: "I live, yet not I, but Christ liveth in me," never penetrated hismind in their full significance, for any thinking about religiousmatters sent shudders of horror through him. He wanted to restcontent with faith, but faith broke faith with him. Such is frequentlythe reward of the sacrificium intellectus. "Not all men can receivethis precept, but only those to whom it is given.... There are eunuchswho have made themselves eunuchs for the sake of the kingdom ofheaven. He who is able to receive this, let him receive it." (Matthew19:11f.) Blind acceptance never leads to a solution; at best it leadsonly to a standstill and is paid for heavily in the next generation.The theriomorphic attributes of the gods show that the gods extendnot only into superhuman regions but also into the16 After the death of Mrs. Jung in 1955, Dr. Marie-Louise von Franz took upthe work on the Grail and brought it to safe harbor in 1958. Cf. Emma Jungand Marie-Louise von Franz: The Grail Legend, trans, by Andrea Dykes,New York and London, 1930). A. J.subhuman realm. The animals are their shadows, as it were, whichnature herself associates with the divine image. The "pisciculiChristianorum" show that those who imitate Christ are themselvesfish that is, unconscious souls who require the cura animarum. Thefish laboratory is a synonym for the ecclesiastical "cure of souls"And just as the wounder wounds himself, so the healer healshimself. Significantly, in the dream the decisive activity is carriedout by the dead upon the dead, in the world beyond consciousness,that is, in the unconscious.At that stage of my life, therefore, I was still not conscious of anessential aspect of my task, nor would I have been able to give a

essential aspect of my task, nor would I have been able to give asatisfactory interpretation of the dream. I could only sense itsmeaning. I still had to overcome the greatest inner resistancesbefore I could write Answer to Job.The inner root of this book is to be found in Aion. There I had dealtwith the psychology of Christianity, and Job is a kind ofprefiguration of Christ. The link between them is the idea ofsuffering. Christ is the suffering servant of God, and so was Job. Inthe case of Christ the sins of the world are the cause of suffering,and the suffering of the Christian is the general answer. This leadsinescapably to the question: Who is responsible for these sins? Inthe final analysis it is God who created the world and its sins, andwho therefore became Christ in order to suffer the fate of humanity.In Aion there are references to the bright and dark side of the divineimage. I cited the "wrath of God" the commandment to fear God,and the petition "Lead us not into temptation". The ambivalent God-image plays a crucial part in the Book of Job. Job expects that Godwill, in a sense, stand by him against God; in this we have a pictureof God's tragic ontradictoriness. This was the main theme ofAnswer to Job,There were outside forces, too, which impelled me to write thisbook. The many questions from the public and from patients hadmade me feel that I must express myself more clearly about thereligious problems of modern man. For years I had hesitated to doso, because I was fully aware of the storm I would be unleashing.But at last I could not help being gripped by the problem, in all itsurgency and difficulty, and I found myself compelled to give ananswer. I did so in the form in which the problem had presenteditself to me, that is, as an experience charged with emotion. I chosethis form deliberately, in order to avoid giving the impression that Iwas bent on proclaiming some eternal truth. My Answer to Job wasmeant to be no more than the utterance of a single individual, who

hopes and expects to arouse some thoughtfulness in his public. Iwas far from wanting to enunciate a metaphysical truth. Y et thetheologians tax me with that very thing, because theological thinkersare so used to dealing with eternal truths that they know no otherkinds. When the physicist says that the atom is of such and such acomposition, and when he sketches a model of it, he too does notintend to express anything like an eternal truth. But theologians donot understand the natural sciences and, particularly, psychologicalthinking. The material of analytical psychology, its principal facts,consist of statements of statements that occur frequently inconsistent form at various places and at various times.The problem of Job in all its ramifications had likewise beenforeshadowed in a dream. It started with my paying a visit to mylong-deceased father. He was living in the country--I did not knowwhere. I saw a house in the style of the eighteenth century, veryroomy, with several rather large outbuildings. It had originally been, Ilearned, an inn at a spa, and it seemed that many greatpersonages, famous people and princes, had stopped there.Furthermore, several had died and their sarcophagi were in a cryptbelonging to the house. My father guarded these as custodian.He was, as I soon discovered, not only the custodian but also adistinguished scholar in his own right which he had never been inhis lifetime. I met him in his study, and, oddly enough, Dr. Y .--whowas about my age and his son, both psychiatrists, were alsopresent. I do not know whether I had asked a question or whethermy father wanted to explain something of his own accord, but in anycase he fetched a big Bible down from a shelf, a heavy folio volumelike the Merian Bible in my library . The Bible my father held wasbound in shiny fishskin. He opened it at the Old T estament Iguessed that he turned to the Pentateuch and began interpreting acertain passage. He did this so swiftly and so learnedly that I couldnot follow him. I noted only that what he said betrayed a vast amount

of variegated knowledge, the significance of which I dimlyapprehended but could not properly judge or grasp. I saw that Dr. Y .understood nothing at all, and his son began to laugh. They thoughtthat my father was going off the deep end and what he said wassimply senile prattle. But it was quite clear to me that it was not dueto morbid excitement, and that there was nothing silly about what hewas saying. On the contrary, his argument was so intelligent and solearned that we in our stupidity simply could not follow it. It dealt withsomething extremely important which fascinated him. That was whyhe was speaking with such intensity; his mind was flooded withprofound ideas. I was annoyed and thought it was a pity that he hadto talk in the presence of three such idiots as we.The two psychiatrists represented a limited medical point of viewwhich, of course, also infects me as a physician. They represent myshadow first and second editions of the shadow, father and son.Then the scene changed. My father and I were in front of the house,facing a kind of shed where, apparently, wood was stacked. Weheard loud thumps, as if large chunks of wood were being throwndown or tossed about. I had the impression that at least twoworkmen must be busy there, but my father indicated to me that theplace was haunted. Some sort of poltergeists were making theracket, evidently.We then entered the house, and I saw that it had very thick walls.We climbed a narrow staircase to the second floor. There a strangesight presented itself: a large hall which was the exact replica of thedivan-i-kaas (council hall) of Sultan Akbar at Fatehpur Sikri. It was ahigh, circular room with a gallery running along the wall, from whichfour bridges led to a basin- shaped center. The basin rested upon ahuge column and formed the sultan's round seat. From this elevatedplace he spoke to his councilors and philosophers, who sat alongthe walls in the gallery. The whole was a gigantic mandala. It

corresponded precisely to the real divan-i-kaas.In the dream I suddenly saw that from the center a steep flight ofstairs ascended to a spot high up on the wall which no longercorresponded to reality. At the top of the stairs was a small door,and my father said, "Now I will lead you into the highest presence."Then he knelt down and touched his forehead to the floor. I imitatedhim, likewise kneeling, with great emotion. For some reason I couldnot bring my forehead quite down to the floor there was perhaps amillimeter to spare. But at least I had made the gesture with him.Suddenly I knew perhaps my father had told me that that upper doorled to a solitary chamber where lived Uriah, King David's general,whom David had shamefully betrayed for the sake of his wifeBathsheba, by commanding his soldiers to abandon Uriah in theface of the enemy.I must make a few explanatory remarks concerning this dream. Theinitial scene describes how the unconscious task which I had left tomy "father," that is, to the unconscious, was working out. He wasobviously engrossed in the Bible--Genesis?--and eager tocommunicate his insights. The fishskin marks the Bible as anunconscious content, for fishes are mute and unconscious. My poorfather does not succeed in communicating either, for the audienceis in part incapable of understanding, in part maliciously stupid.After this defeat we cross the street to the "other side," wherepoltergeists are at work. Poltergeist phenomena usually take placein the vicinity of young people before puberty; that is to say , I am stillimmature and too unconscious. The Indian ambience illustrates the"other side." When I was in India, the mandala structure of thedivan-i-kaas had in actual fact powerfully impressed me as therepresentation of a content related to a center. The center is theseat of Akbar the Great, who rules over a subcontinent, who is a"lord of this world," like David. But even higher than David stands

his guiltless victim, his loyal general Uriah, whom he abandoned tothe enemy. Uriah is a prefiguration of Christ, the god-man who wasabandoned by God. "My God, my God, why hast thou forsakenme?" On top of that, David had "taken unto himself" Uriah's wife.Only later did I understand what this allusion to Uriah signified: notonly was I forced to speak publicly, and very much to my detriment,about the ambivalence of the God-image in the Old T estament; butalso, my wife would be taken from me by death.These were the things that awaited me, hidden in the unconscious. Ihad to submit to this fate, and ought really to have touched myforehead to the floor, so that my submission would be complete. Butsomething prevented me from doing so entirely, and kept me just amillimeter away. Something in me was saying, "All very well, but notentirely." Something in me was defiant and determined not to be adumb fish: and if there were not something of the sort in free men,no Book of Job would have been written several hundred yearsbefore the birth of Christ. Man always has some mental reservation,even in the face of divine decrees. Otherwise, where would be hisfreedom? And what would be the use of that freedom if it could notthreaten Him who threatens it?Uriah, then, lives in a higher place than Akbar. He is even, as thedream said, the "highest presence," an expression which properlyis used only of God, unless we are dealing in Byzantinisms. I cannothelp thinking here of the Buddha and his relationship to the gods.For the devout Asiatic, the T athagata is the All-Highest, theAbsolute. For that reason Hinayana Buddhism has been suspectedof atheism very wrongly so. By virtue of the power of the gods manis enabled to gain an insight into his Creator. He has even beengiven the power to annihilate Creation in its essential aspect, thatis, man's consciousness of the world. T oday he can extinguish allhigher life on earth by radioactivity. The idea of world annihilation isalready suggested by the Buddha: by means of enlightenment the

Nidana chain--the chain of causality which leads inevitably to oldage, sickness, and death--can be broken, so that the illusion ofBeing comes to an end. Schopenhauer's negation of the Will pointsprophetically to a problem of the future that has already comethreatingly close. The dream discloses a thought and a premonitionthat have long been present in humanity: the idea of the creaturethat surpasses its creator by a small but decisive factor.After this excursion into the world of dreams, I must once morecome back to my writings. In Aion I embarked upon a cycle ofproblems that needed to be dealt with separately. I had attemptedto explain how the appearance of Christ coincided with thebeginning of a new aeon, the age of the Fishes. A synchronicityexists between the life of Christ and the objective astronomicalevent, the entrance of the spring equinox into the sign of Pisces.Christ is therefore the "Fish" (just as Hammurabi before him wasthe "Ram"), and comes forth as the ruler of the new aeon. This ledto the problem of synchronicity, which I discussed in my paper"Synchronicity: An Acausal Connecting Principle."[17]The Christ problem in Aion finally led me to the question of how thephenomenon of the Anthropos in psychological terms, the self isexpressed in the experience of the individual. I attempted to give ananswer to this in Von den Wurzeln des Bewusstseins ( 1954 ).[18]There I was concerned with the interplay between conscious andunconscious, with the development of consciousness from theunconscious, and with the impact of the greater personality, theinner man, upon the life of every individual.This investigation was rounded out by the Mysterium Coniunctionis,in which I once again took up the problem of the transference, butprimarily followed my original intention of representing the wholerange of alchemy as a kind of psychology of alchemy, or as analchemical basis for depth psychology. In Mysterium Coniunctionis

my psychology was at last given its place in reality and establishedupon its historical foundations. Thus my task was finished, my workdone, and now it can stand. The moment I touched bottom, Ireached the bounds of scientific understanding, the transcendental,the nature of the archetype per se, concerning which no furtherscientific statements can be made.The survey I have given here of my work is, of course, only a briefsummary. I really ought to say a great deal more, or a17 In C. G. Jung and W. Pauli, The Interpretation of Nature and the Psyche(New York and London, 1954); also in The Structure and Dynamics of thePsyche (CW 8). 18 The essays in this book are mostly contained in volumes 8, 9 (i), and 11of the Collected Works.great deal less. It is an improvisation, like everything I am relatinghere. It is born of the moment. Those who know my work maypossibly profit by it; others perhaps will be impelled to look into myideas. My life is what I have done, my scientific work; the one isinseparable from the other. The work is the expression of my innerdevelopment; for commitment to the contents of the unconsciousforms the man and produces his transformations. My works can beregarded as stations along my life's way.All my writings may be considered tasks imposed from within; theirsource was a fateful compulsion. What I wrote were things thatassailed me from within myself. I permitted the spirit that moved meto speak out. I have never counted upon any strong response, anypowerful resonance, to my writings. They represent a compensationfor our times, and I have been impelled to say what no one wants tohear. For that reason, and especially at the beginning, I often feltutterly forlorn. I knew that what I said would be unwelcome, for it isdifficult for people of our times to accept the counterweight to theconscious world. T oday I can say that it is truly astonishing that I

have had as much success as has been accorded me far morethan I ever could have expected. I have the feeling that I have doneall that it was possible for me to do. Without a doubt that life workcould have been larger, and could have been done better; but morewas not within my power.

VIIIThe TowerGRADUALLY , through my scientific work, I was able to put myfantasies and the contents of the unconscious on a solid footing.Words and paper, however, did not seem real enough to me;something more was needed. I had to achieve a kind ofrepresentation in stone of my innermost thoughts and of theknowledge I had acquired. Or, to put it another way, I had to make aconfession of faith in stone. That was the beginning of the "T ower,"the house which I built for myself at Bollingen.It was settled from the start that I would build near the water. I hadalways been curiously drawn by the scenic charm of the upper lakeof Zurich, and so in 1922 I bought some land in Bollingen. It issituated in the area of St. Meinrad and is old church land, havingformerly belonged to the monastery of St. Gall.At first I did not plan a proper house, but merely a kind of primitiveone-story dwelling. It was to be a round structure with a hearth in thecenter and bunks along the walls. I more or less had in mind anAfrican hut where the fire, ringed by a few stones, burns in themiddle, and the whole life of the family revolves around this center.Primitive huts concretize an idea of wholeness, a familialwholeness in which all sorts of small domestic animals likewiseparticipate. But I altered the plan even during the first stages ofbuilding, for I felt it was too primitive. I realized it would have to be aregular two-story house, not a mere hut crouched on the ground. Soin 1923 the first round house was built, and when it was finished I

saw that it had become a suitable dwelling tower.The feeling of repose and renewal that I had in this tower wasintense from the start. It represented for me the maternal hearth. ButI became increasingly aware that it did not yet express everythingthat needed saying, that something was still, lacking. And so, fouryears later, in 1927, the central structure was added, with a tower-like annex.After some time had passed again the interval was four years Ionce more had a feeling of incompleteness. The building stillseemed too primitive to me, and so in 1931 the tower-like annexwas extended. I wanted a room in this tower where I could exist formyself alone. I had in mind what I had seen in Indian houses, inwhich there is usually an area though it may be only a corner of aroom separated off by a curtain to which the inhabitants canwithdraw. There they meditate for perhaps a quarter or half an hour,or do Y oga exercises. Such an area of retirement is essential inIndia, where people live crowded very close together.In my retiring room I am by myself. I keep the key with me all thetime; no one else is allowed in there except with my permission. Inthe course of the years I have done paintings on the walls, and sohave expressed all those things which have carried me out of timeinto seclusion, out of the present into timelessness. Thus thesecond tower became for me a place of spiritual concentration.In 1935, the desire arose in me for a piece of fenced-in land, Ineeded a larger space that would stand open to the sky and tonature. And so--once again after an interval of four years--I added acourtyard and a loggia by the lake, which formed a fourth elementthat was separated from the unitary threeness of the house. Thus aquaternity had arisen, four different parts of the building, and,moreover, in the course of twelve years.

After my wife's death in 1955, I felt an inner obligation to becomewhat I myself am. To put it in the language of the Bollingen house, Isuddenly realized that the small central section which crouched solow, so hidden, was myself! I could no longer hide myself behind the"maternal" and the "spiritua!" towers. So, in that same year, I addedan upper story to this section, which represents myself, or my ego-personality. Earlier, I would not have been able to do this; I wouldhave regarded it as presumptuous self-emphasis. Now it signifiedan extension of consciousness achieved in old age. With that thebuilding was complete. I had started the first tower in 1923, twomonths after the death of my mother. These two dates aremeaningful because the T ower, as we shall see, is connected withthe dead.From the beginning I felt the T ower as in some way a place ofmaturation a maternal womb or a maternal figure in which I couldbecome what I was, what I am and will be. It gave me a feeling as if Iwere being reborn in stone. It is thus a concretization of theindividuation process, a memorial aere perennius. During thebuilding work, of course, I never considered these matters. I built thehouse in sections, always following the concrete needs of themoment. It might also be said that I built, it in a kind of dream. Onlyafterward did I see how all the parts fitted together and that ameaningful form had resulted: a symbol of psychic wholeness.At Bollingen I am in the midst of my true life, I am most deeplymyself. Here I am, as it were, the "age-old son of the mother." Thatis how alchemy puts it, very wisely , for the "old man" the "ancient,"whom I had already experienced as a child, is personality No. 2,who has always been and always will be. He exists outside timeand is the son of the maternal unconscious. In my fantasies he tookthe form of Philemon, and he comes to life again at Bollingen.

At times I feel as if I am spread out over the landscape and insidethings, and am myself living in every tree, in the plashing of thewaves, in the clouds and the animals that come and go, in theprocession of the seasons. There is nothing in the T ower that hasnot grown into its own form over the decades, nothing with which Iam not linked. Here everything has its history, and mine; here isspace for the spaceless kingdom of the world's and the psyche'shinterland.I have done without electricity, and tend the fireplace and stovemyself. Evenings, I light the old lamps. There is no running water,and I pump the water from the well. I chop the wood and cook thefood. These simple acts make man simple; and how difficult it is tobe simple!In Bollingen, silence surrounds me almost audibly, and I live "inmodest harmony with nature."[1] Thoughts rise to the surface whichreach back into the centuries, and accordingly anticipate a remotefuture. Here the torment of creation is lessened; creativity and playare close together.In 1950 I made a kind of monument out of stone to express what theTo we r  m e a ns  t o  m e .  The  s t o r y o f  ho w t hi s  s t o ne  c a m e  to me is acurious one. I needed stones for building the enclosing wall for theso-called garden, and ordered them from the quarry near Bollingen.I was standing by when the mason gave all the measurements tothe owner of the quarry, who wrote them down in his notebook.When the stones arrived by ship and were unloaded, it turned outthat the cornerstone had altogether the wrong measurements;instead of a triangular stone, a square block had been sent: aperfect cube of much larger dimensions than had been ordered,about twenty inches thick. The mason was furious and told thebarge men to take it right back with them.

But when I saw the stone, I said, "No, that is my stone, I must haveit!" For I had seen at once that it suited me perfectly and that Iwanted to do something with it. Only I did not yet know what.The first thing that occurred to me was a Latin verse by thealchemist Arnaldus de Villanova (died 1313). I chiseled this into thestone; in translation it goes:1 Tide of an old Chinese woodcut showing a little old man in a heroiclandscape.Here stands the mean, uncomely stone, "Tis v ery cheap in price! The more it is despised by fools, The more loved by the wise. This verse refers to the alchemist's stone, the lapis, which isdespised and rejected.Soon something else emerged. I began to see on the front face, inthe natural structure of the stone, a small circle, a sort of eye, whichlooked at me. I chiseled it into the stone, and in the center made atiny homunculus. This corresponds to the "little doll" (pupilla)yourself which you see in the pupil of another's eye; a kind of Kabir,or the T elesphoros of Asklepios. Ancient statues show him wearinga hooded cloak and carrying a lantern. At the same time he is apointer of the way. I dedicated a few words to him which came intomy mind while I was working. The inscription is in Greek; thetranslation goes:Ti me i s a chi ld playi ng li ke a chi ld playi ng a board game thekingdom of the child. This is T elesphoros, who roams through thedark regions of this cosmos and glows like a star out of the depths.He points the way to the gates of the sun and to the land ofdreams.[2]

These words came to me one after the other while I worked on thestone.On the third face, the one facing the lake, I let the stone itself speak,as it were, in a Latin inscription. These sayings are more or lessquotations from alchemy. This is the translation:I am an orphan, alone; nevertheless I am found everywhere. I amone, but opposed to myself. I am youth and old man at one and thesame time. I have known neither father nor mother, because I havehad to be fetched out of the deep like a fish, or fell like a white stonefrom heaven. In woods and mountains I roam, but I am hidden in theinnermost soul of man. I am mortal for everyone, yet I am nottouched by the cycle of aeons.2 The first sentence is a fragment from Heraclitus; the second sentencealludes to the Mithras liturgy, and the last sentence to Homer (Odyssey,Book 24, verse 12),In conclusion, under the saying of Arnaldus de Villanova, I set downin Latin the words "In remembrance of his seventy-fifth birthday C.G. Jung made and placed this here as a thanks offering, in the year1950."When the stone was finished, I looked at it again and again,wondering about it and asking myself what lay behind my impulse tocarve it.The stone stands outside the Tower, and is like an explanation of it.It is a manifestation of the occupant, but one which remainsincomprehensible to others. Do you know what I wanted to chiselinto the back face of the stone? "Le cri de Merlin!" For what thestone expressed reminded me of Merlin's life in the forest, after hehad vanished from the world. Men still hear his cries, so the legend

runs, but they cannot understand or interpret them.Merlin represents an attempt by the medieval unconscious to createa parallel figure to Parsifal. Parsifal is a Christian hero, and Merlin,son of the devil and a pure virgin, is his dark brother. In the twelfthcentury, when the legend arose, there were as yet no premises bywhich his intrinsic meaning could be understood. Hence he endedin exile, and hence "le cri de Merlin" which still sounded from theforest after his death. This cry that no one could understand impliesthat he lives on in unredeemed form. His story is not yet finished,and he still walks abroad. It might be said that the secret of Merlinwas carried on by alchemy, primarily in the figure of Mercurius.Then Merlin was taken up again in my psychology of theunconscious and remains uncomprehended to this dayl That isbecause most people find it quite beyond them to live on closeterms with the unconscious. Again and again I have had to learnhow hard this is for people.I was in Bollingen just as the first tower was being finished. Thiswas the winter of 1923-24. As far as I can recall, there was no snowon the ground; perhaps it was early spring. I had been aloneperhaps for a week, perhaps longer. An indescribable stillnessprevailed.One evening I can still remember it precisely I was sitting by thefireplace and had put a big kettle on the fire to make hot water forwashing up. The water began to boil and the kettle to sing. Itsounded like many voices, or stringed instruments, or even like awhole orchestra. It was just like polyphonic music, which in reality Icannot abide, though in this case it seemed to me peculiarlyinteresting. It was as though there were one orchestra inside theTo we r  a nd  a no t he r  o ne  o ut s i d e .  No w o ne  dominated, now theother, as though they were responding to each other,

I sat and listened, fascinated. For far more than an hour I listened tothe concert, to this natural melody. It was soft music, containing, aswell, all the discords of nature. And that was right, for nature is notonly harmonious; she is also dreadfully contradictory and chaotic.The music was that way too: an out-pouring of sounds, having thequality of water and of wind so strange that it is simply impossibleto describe it.On another such still night when I was alone in Bollingen (it was inthe late winter or early spring of 1924) I awoke to the sound of softfootsteps going around the T ower. Distant music sounded, comingcloser and closer, and then I heard voices laughing and talking. Ithought, 'Who can be prowling around? What is this all about?There is only the little footpath along the lake, and scarcely anybodyever walks on it!" While I was thinking these things I became wideawake, and went to the window. I opened the shutters all was still.There was no one in sight, nothing to be heard no wind nothingnothing at all."This is really strange," I thought. I was certain that the footsteps, thelaughter and talk, had been real. But apparently I had only beendreaming. I returned to bed--and mulled over the way we candeceive ourselves after all, and what might have been the cause ofsuch a strange dream. In the midst of this, I fell asleep again--and atonce the same dream began: once more I heard footsteps, talk,laughter, music. At the same time I had a visual image of severalhundred dark-clad figures, possibly peasant boys in their Sundayclothes, who had come down from the mountains and were pouringin around the T ower, on both sides, with a great deal of loudtrampling, laughing, singing, and playing of accordions. Irritably, Ithought, "This is really the limit! I thought it was a dream and now itturns out to be reality!" At this point, I woke up. Once again I jumpedup, opened the window and shutters, and found everything just thesame as before: a deathly still moonlit night. Then I thought: "Why,

this is simply a case of haunting!"Naturally I asked myself what it meant when a dream was soinsistent on its reality and at the same time on my being awake.Usually we experience that only when we see a ghost. Being awakemeans perceiving reality. The dream therefore represented asituation equivalent to reality, in which it created a kind of wakenedstate. In this sort of dream, as opposed to ordinary dreams, theunconscious seems bent on conveying a powerful impression ofreality to the dreamer, an impression which is emphasized byrepetition. The sources of such realities are known to be physicalsensations on the one hand, and archetypal figures on the other.That night everything was so completely real, or at least seemed tobe so, that I could scarcely sort out the two realities. Nor could Imake anything of the dream itself. What was the meaning of thesemusic-making peasant boys passing by in a long procession? Itseemed to me they had come out of curiosity, in order to look at theTower.Never again did I experience or dream anything similar, and Icannot recall ever having heard of a parallel to it. It was only muchlater that I found an explanation. This was when I came across theseventeenth-century Lucerne chronicle by Rennward Cysat. He tellsthe following story: On a high pasture of Mount Pilatus, which isparticularly notorious for spooks it is said that Wotan to this daypractices his magic arts there Cysat, while climbing the mountain,was disturbed one night by a procession of men who poured pasthis hut on both sides, playing music and singing precisely what Ihad experienced at the Tower.The next morning Cysat asked the herdsman with whom he hadspent that night what could have been the meaning of it. The manhad a ready explanation: those must be the departed folk--salig Lut,

in Swiss dialect; the phrase also means blessed folk namely ,Wotan's army of departed souls. These, he said, were in the habitof walking abroad and showing themselves.It may be suggested that this is a phenomenon of solitude, theoutward emptiness and silence being compensated by the imageof a crowd of people. This would put it in the same class with thehallucinations of hermits, which are likewise compensatory. But dowe know what realities such stories may be founded on? It is alsopossible that I had been so sensitized by the solitude that I was ableto perceive the procession of "departed folk" who passed by.The explanation of this experience as a psychic compensationnever entirely satisfied me, and to say that it was a hallucinationseemed to me to beg the question. I felt obliged to consider thepossibility of its reality, especially in view of the seventeenth-centuryaccount which had come my way.It would seem most likely to have been a synchronisticphenomenon. Such phenomena demonstrate that premonitions orvisions very often have some correspondence in external reality.There actually existed, as I discovered, a real parallel to myexperience. In the Middle Ages just such gatherings of young mentook place. These were the Reislaufer (mercenaries) who usuallyassembled in spring, marched from Central Switzerland to Locarno,met at the Casa di Ferro in Minusio and then marched on togetherto Milan. In Italy they served as soldiers, fighting for foreign princes.My vision, therefore, might have been one of these gatheringswhich took place regularly each spring when the young men, withsinging and jollity, bade farewell to their native land.When we began to build at Bollingen in 1923, my eldest daughtercame to see the spot, and exclaimed, "What, you're building here?There are corpses about!" Naturally I thought, "Ridiculous! Nothing

of the sort!" But when we were constructing the annex four yearslater, we did come upon a skeleton. It lay at a depth of seven feet inthe ground. An old rifle bullet was imbedded in the elbow. Fromvarious indications it seemed evident that the body had beenthrown into the grave in an advanced state of decay. It belonged toone of the many dozens of French soldiers who were drowned inthe Linth in 1799 and were later washed up on the shores of theUpper Lake. These men were drowned when the Austrians blew upthe bridge of Grynau which the French were storming. A photographof the open grave with the skeleton and the date of its discoveryAugust 22, 1927 is preserved at the Tower.I arranged a regular burial on my property, and fired a gun threetimes over the soldier's grave. Then I set up a gravestone with aninscription for him. My daughter had sensed the presence of thedead body. Her power to sense such things is something sheinherits from my grandmother on my mother's side.In the winter of 1955-56 I chiseled the names of my paternalancestors on three stone tablets and placed them in the court- yardof the T ower. I painted the ceiling with motifs from my own and mywife's arms, and from those of my sons-in-law. The Jung familyoriginally had a phoenix for its arms, the bird obviously beingconnected with "young," "youth," "rejuvenation." My grandfatherchanged the elements of the arms, probably out of a spirit ofresistance toward his father. He was an ardent Freemason andGrand Master of the Swiss lodge. This had a good deal to do withthe changes he made in the armorial bearings. I mention this point,in itself of no consequence, because it belongs in the historicalnexus of my thinking and my life.In keeping with this revision of my grandfather's, my coat of arms nolonger contains the original phoenix. Instead there is a cross azurein chief dexter and in base sinister a blue bunch of grapes in a field

d'or; separating these is an estoile d'or in a fess azure.[3] Thesymbolism of these arms is Masonic, or Rosicrucian. Just as crossand rose represent the Rosicrucian problem of opposites ("percrucem ad rosam"), that is, the Christian and Dionysian elements,so cross and grapes are symbols of the heavenly and the chthonicspirit. The uniting symbol is the gold star, the aurum philosophorum.3 Translated from the language of heraldry: a blue cross in the upper rightand blue grapes in the lower left in a field of gold; a blue bar with a gold star.The Rosicrucians derived from Hermetic or alchemical philosophy.One of their founders was Michael Maier ( 1568-1622), a well-known alchemist and younger contemporary of the relativelyunknown but more important Gerardus Dorneus (end of thesixteenth century), whose treatises fill the first volume of theTheatrum Chemicum of 1602. The two men lived in Frankfurt, whichseems to have been a center of alchemical philosophy at the time.In any case, as Count Palatine and court physician to Rudolph II,Michael Maier was something of a local celebrity. In neighboringMainz at that time lived Dr. med. et. jur. Carl Jung (died 1654), ofwhom nothing else is known, since the family tree breaks off withmy great-great-grandfather who lived at the beginning of theeighteenth century. This was Sigmund Jung, a civis Moguntinus,citizen of Mainz. The hiatus is due to the fact that the municipalarchives of Mainz were burned in the course of a siege during theWar of the Spanish Succession. It is a safe surmise that thisevidently learned Dr. Carl Jung was familiar with the writings of thetwo alchemists, for the pharmacology of the day was still very muchunder the influence of Paracelsus. Dorneus was an outspokenParacelsist and even composed a voluminous commentary on theParacelsan treatise, De Vita Longa. He also, more than all theother alchemists, dealt with the process of individuation. In view ofthe fact that a large part of my life work has revolved around thestudy of the problem of opposites, and especially their alchemical

symbolism, all this is not without a certain interest.When I was working on the stone tablets, I became aware of thefateful links between me and my ancestors. I feel very strongly that Iam under the influence of things or questions which were leftincomplete and unanswered by my parents and grandparents andmore distant ancestors. It often seems as if there were animpersonal karma within a family , which is passed on from parentsto children. It has always seemed to me that I had to answerquestions which fate had posed to my forefathers, and which hadnot yet been answered, or as if I had to complete, or perhapscontinue, things which previous ages had left unfinished. It is difficultto determine whether these questions are more of a personal ormore of a general (collective) nature. It seems to me that the latter isthe case. A collective problem, if not recognized as such, alwaysappears as a personal problem, and in individual cases may givethe impression that something is out of order in the realm of thepersonal psyche. The personal sphere is indeed disturbed, butsuch disturbances need not be primary; they may well besecondary, the consequence of an insupportable change in thesocial atmosphere. The cause of disturbance is, therefore, not to besought in the personal surroundings, but rather in the collectivesituation. Psychotherapy has hitherto taken this matter far too littleinto account.Like anyone who is capable of some introspection, I had earlytaken it for granted that the split in my personality was my ownpurely personal affair and responsibility. Faust, to be sure, hadmade the problem somewhat easier for me by confessing, "Twosouls, alas, are housed within my breast"; but he had thrown no lighton the cause of this dichotomy. His insight seemed, in a sense,directed straight at me. In the days when I first read Faust I could notremotely guess the extent to which Goethe's strange heroic mythwas a collective experience and that it prophetically anticipated the

fate of the Germans. Therefore I felt personally implicated, andwhen Faust, in his hubris and self-inflation, caused the murder ofPhilemon and Baucis, I felt guilty , quite as if I myself in the past hadhelped commit the murder of the two old people. This strange ideaalarmed me, and I regarded it as my responsibility to atone for thiscrime, or to prevent its repetition.My false conclusion was further supported by a bit of oddinformation that I picked up during those early years, I heard that ithad been bruited about that my grandfather Jung had been anillegitimate son of Goethe's.[4] This annoying story made animpression upon me insofar as it at once corroborated andseemed to explain my curious reactions to Faust. It is true that I didnot believe in reincarnation, but I was instinctively familiar with thatconcept which the Indians call karma. Since in those days I had noidea of the existence of the unconscious, I could not have had anypsychological understanding of my reactions. I also did not know nomore than, even today, it is generally known that the future isunconsciously prepared long in advance and therefore can beguessed by clairvoyants. Thus, when the news arrived of thecrowning of Kaiser Wilhelm I at Versailles, Jakob Burckhardtexclaimed, "That is the doom of Germany." The archetypes ofWagner were already knocking at the gates, and along with themcame the Dionysian experience of Nietzsche which might better beascribed to the god of ecstasy, Wotan. The hubris of the Wilhelmineera alienated Europe and paved the way for the disaster of 1914.4 See above, Chap. II, n. i, pp. 35-36.In my youth (around 1890) I was unconsciously caught up by thisspirit of the age, and had no methods at hand for extricating myselffrom it. Faust struck a chord in me and pierced me through in a waythat I could not but regard as personal. Most of all, it awakened inme the problem of opposites, of good and evil, of mind and matter,

of light and darkness, Faust, the inept, purblind philosopher,encounters the dark side of his being, his sinister shadow,Mephistopheles, who in spite of his negating disposition representsthe true spirit of life as against the arid scholar who hovers on thebrink of suicide. My own inner contradictions appeared here indramatized form; Goethe had written virtually a basic outline andpattern of my own conflicts and solutions. The dichotomy of Faust-Mephistopheles came together within myself into a single person,and I was that person. In other words, I was directly struck, andrecognized that this was my fate. Hence, all the crises of the dramaaffected me personally; at one point I had passionately to agree, atanother to oppose. No solution could be a matter of indifference tome. Later I consciously linked my work to what Faust had passedover: respect for the eternal rights of man, recognition of "theancient," and the continuity of culture and intellectual history.[5]Our souls as well as our bodies are composed of individualelements which were all already present in the ranks of our an-cestors. The "newness" in the individual psyche is an endlesslyvaried recombination of age-old components. Body and soultherefore have an intensely historical character and find no5 Jung's attitude is shown in the inscription he placed over the gate of theTower:  P hi l emoni s  S ac rum F aus t i  P oenft ent i a (S hri ne of P hi l emonRepentance of Faust) . When the gate was walled up, he put the samewords above the entrance to the second tower. A. J.proper place in what is new, in things that have just come intobeing. That is to say, our ancestral components are only partly athome in such things. We are very far from having finishedcompletely with the Middle Ages, classical antiquity, and primitivity,as our modern psyches pretend. Nevertheless, we have plungeddown a cataract of progress which sweeps us on into the future withever wilder violence the farther it takes us from our roots. Once the

past has been breached, it is usually annihilated, and there is nostopping the forward motion. But it is precisely the loss ofconnection with the past, our uprootedness, which has given rise tothe "discontents" of civilization and to such a flurry and haste thatwe live more in the future and its chimerical promises of a goldenage than in the present, with which our whole evolutionarybackground has not yet caught up. We rush impetuously intonovelty, driven by a mounting sense of insufficiency, dissatisfaction,and restlessness. We no longer live on what we have, but onpromises, no longer in the light of the present day, but in thedarkness of the future, which, we expect, will at last bring the propersunrise. We refuse to recognize that everything better is purchasedat the price of something worse; that, for example, the hope ofgreater freedom is canceled out by increased enslavement to thestate, not to speak of the terrible perils to which the most brilliantdiscoveries of science expose us. The less we understand of whatour fathers and forefathers sought, the less we understandourselves, and thus we help with all our might to rob the individual ofhis roots and his guiding instincts, so that he becomes a particle inthe mass, ruled only by what Nietzsche called the spirit of gravity.Reforms by advances, that is, by new methods or gadgets, are ofcourse impressive at first, but in the long run they are dubious andin any case dearly paid for. They by no means increase thecontentment or happiness of people on the whole. Mostly, they aredeceptive sweetenings of existence, like speedier communicationswhich unpleasantly accelerate the tempo of life and leave us withless time than ever before. Omnis festinatio ex parte diaboli est allhaste is of the devil, as the old masters used to say.Reforms by retrogressions, on the other hand, are as a rule lessexpensive and in addition more lasting, for they return to thesimpler, tried and tested ways of the past and make the sparsestuse of newspapers, radio, television, and all supposedly timesaving

innovations.In this book I have devoted considerable space to my subjectiveview of the world, which, however, is, not a product of rationalthinking. It is rather a vision such as will come to one whoundertakes, deliberately, with half-closed eyes and somewhatclosed ears, to see and hear the form and voice of being. If ourimpressions are too distinct, we are held to the hour and minute ofthe present and have no way of knowing how our ancestral psycheslisten to and understand the present in other words, how ourunconscious is responding to it. Thus we remain ignorant ofwhether our ancestral components find an elementary gratificationin our lives, or whether they are repelled. Inner peace andcontentment depend in large measure upon whether or not thehistorical family which is inherent in the individual can beharmonized with the ephemeral conditions of the present.In the Tower at Bollingen it is as if one lived in many centuriessimultaneously. The place will outlive me, and in its location andstyle it points backward to things of long ago. There is very littleabout it to suggest the present. If a man of the sixteenth centurywere to move into the house, only the kerosene lamp and thematches would be new to him; otherwise, he would know his wayabout without difficulty. There is nothing to disturb the dead, neitherelectric light nor telephone. Moreover, my ancestors' souls aresustained by the atmosphere of the house, since I answer for themthe questions that their lives once left behind. I carve out roughanswers as best I can. I have even drawn them on the walls. It is asif a silent, greater family , stretching down the centuries, werepeopling the house. There I live in my second personality and seelife in the round, as something forever coming into being andpassing on.

IXTravelsi. NORTH AFRICAAT THE BEGINNING of 1920 a friend told me that he had abusiness trip to make to Tunis, and would I like to accompany him?I said yes immediately. We set out in March, going first to Algiers.Following the coast, we reached Tunis and from there Sousse,where I left my friend to his business affairs.At last I was where I had longed to be: in a non-European countrywhere no European language was spoken and no Christianconceptions prevailed, where a different race lived and a differenthistorical tradition and philosophy had set its stamp upon the faceof the crowd. I had often wished to be able for once to see theEuropean from outside, his image reflected back at him by analtogether foreign milieu. T o be sure, there was my ignorance of theArabic language, which I deeply regretted; but to make up for this Iwas all the more attentive in observing the people and theirbehavior. Frequently I sat for hours in an Arab coffee house,listening to conversations of which I understood not a word. But Istudied the people's gestures, and especially their expression ofemotions; I observed the subtle change in their gestures when theyspoke with a European, and thus learned to see to some extent withdifferent eyes and to know the white man outside his ownenvironment.What the Europeans regard as Oriental calm and apathy seemed

to me a mask; behind it I sensed a restlessness, a degree ofagitation, which I could not explain. Strangely, in setting foot uponMoorish soil, I found myself haunted by an impression which I myselfcould not understand: I kept thinking that the land smelled queer. Itwas the smell of blood, as though the soil were soaked with blood.This strip of land, it occurred to me, had already borne the brunt ofthree civilizations: Carthaginian, Roman, and Christian. What thetechnological age will do with Islam remains to be seen.When I left Sousse, I traveled south to Sfax, and thence into theSahara, to the oasis city of T ozeur. The city lies on a slightelevation, on the margin of a plateau, at whose foot lukewarm,slightly saline springs well up profusely and irrigate the oasisthrough a thousand little canals. T owering date palms formed agreen, shady roof overhead, under which peach, apricot, and figtrees flourished, and beneath these alfalfa of an unbelievable green.Several kingfishers, shining like jewels, flitted through the foliage. Inthe comparative coolness of this green shade strolled figures cladin white, among them a great number of affectionate couplesholding one another in close embrace obviously homosexualfriendships. I felt suddenly transported to the times of classicalGreece, where this inclination formed the cement of a society ofmen and of the polls based on that society. It was clear that menspoke to men and women to women here. Only a few of the latterwere to be seen, nunlike, heavily veiled figures. I saw a few withoutveils. These, my dragoman explained, were prostitutes. On themain streets the scene was dominated by men and children.My dragoman confirmed my impression of the prevalence ofhomosexuality, and of its being taken for granted, and promptlymade me offers. The good fellow could have no notion of thethoughts which had struck me like a flash of lightning, suddenlyilluminating my point of observation. I felt cast back many centuriesto an infinitely more naive world of adolescents who were

preparing, with the aid of a slender knowledge of the Koran, toemerge from their original state of twilight consciousness, in whichthey had existed from time immemorial, and to become aware oftheir own existence, in self-defense against the forces threateningthem from the North.While I was still caught up in this dream of a static, age-oldexistence, I suddenly thought of my pocket watch, the symbol of theEuropean's accelerated tempo. This, no doubt, was the dark cloudthat hung threateningly over the heads of these unsuspecting souls.They suddenly seemed to me like game who do not see the hunterbut, vaguely uneasy, scent him--"him" being the god of time who willinevitably chop into the bits and pieces of days, hours, minutes, andseconds that duration which is still the closest thing to eternity.From T ozeur I went on to the oasis of Nefta. I rode off with mydragoman early in the morning, shortly after sunrise. Our mountswere large, swift-footed mules, on which we made rapid progress.As we approached the oasis, a single rider, wholly swathed inwhite, came toward us. With proud bearing he rode by withoutoffering us any greeting, mounted on a black mule whose harnesswas banded and studded with silver. He made an impressive,elegant figure. Here was a man who certainly possessed no pocketwatch, let alone a wrist watch; for he was obviously and unself-consciously the person he had always been. He lacked that faintnote of foolishness which clings to the European. The European is,to be sure, convinced that he is no longer what he was ages ago;but he does not know what he has since become. His watch tellshim that since the "Middle Ages" time and its synonym, progress,have crept up on him and irrevocably taken something from him.With lightened baggage he continues his journey, with steadilyincreasing velocity , toward nebulous goals. He compensates for theloss of gravity and the corresponding sentiment "incompletitude by

the illusion of his triumphs, such as steamships, railroads,airplanes, and rockets, that rob him of his duration and transporthim into another reality of speeds and explosive accelerations.The deeper we penetrated into the Sahara, the more time sloweddown for me; it even threatened to move backward. Theshimmering heat waves rising up contributed a good deal to mydreamy state, and when we reached the first palms and dwellings ofthe oasis, it seemed to me that everything here was exactly the wayit should be and the way it had always been.Early the next morning I was awakened by the various unfamiliarnoises outside my inn. There was a large open square which hadbeen empty the night before, but which was now crowded withpeople, camels, mules, and donkeys. The camels groaned andannounced in manifold variations of tone their chronic discontent,and the donkeys competed with cacophonous screams. Thepeople ran around in a great state of excitement, shouting andgesticulating. They looked savage and rather alarming. Mydragoman explained that a great festival was being celebrated thatday. Several desert tribes had come in during the night to do twodays of field work for the marabout. The marabout was theadministrator of poor relief and owned many fields in the oasis. Thepeople were to lay out a new field and irrigation canals to match.At the farther end of the square there suddenly rose a cloud of dust;a green flag unfolded, and drums rolled. At the head of a longprocession of hundreds of wild-looking men carrying baskets andshort, wide hoes appeared a white-bearded, venerable old man.He radiated inimitable natural dignity, as though he were a hundredyears old. This was the marabout, astride a white mule. The mendanced around him, beating small drums. The scene was one ofwild excitement, hoarse shouting, dust, and heat. With fanaticpurposefulness the procession swarmed by, out into the oasis, as if

going to battle.I followed this horde at a cautious distance, and my dragomanmade no attempt to encourage me to approach closer until wereached the spot where the "work" was going on. Here, if possible,even greater excitement prevailed; people were beating drums andshouting wildly; the site of the work resembled a disturbed anthill;everything was being done with the utmost haste. Carrying theirbaskets filled with heavy loads of earth, men danced along to therhythm of the drums; others hacked into the ground at a furious rate,digging ditches and erecting dams. Through this wild tumult themarabout rode along on his white mule, evidently issuinginstructions with the dignified, mild, and weary gestures ofadvanced age. Wherever he came, the haste, shouting, and rhythmintensified, forming the background against which the calm figure ofthe holy man stood out with extraordinary effectiveness. Towardevening the crowd was visibly overcome by exhaustion; the mensoon dropped down beside their camels into deep sleep. Duringthe night, after the usual stupendous concert of the dogs, utterstillness prevailed, until at the first rays of the rising sun theinvocation of the muezzin which always deeply stirred mesummoned the people to their morning prayer.This scene taught me something: these people live from theiraffects, are moved and have their being in emotions. Theirconsciousness takes care of their 'orientation in space andtransmits impressions from outside, and it is also stirred by innerimpulses and affects. But it is not given to reflection; the ego hasalmost no autonomy. The situation is not so different with theEuropean; but we are, after all, somewhat more complicated. Atany rate the European possesses a certain measure of will anddirected intention. What we lack is intensity of life.Without wishing to fall under the spell of the primitive, I nevertheless

had been psychically infected. This manifested itself outwardly in aninfectious enteritis which cleared up after a few days, thanks to thelocal treatment of rice water and calomel.Overcharged with ideas, I finally went back to Tunis. The nightbefore we embarked from Marseilles I had a dream which, Isensed, summed up the whole experience. This was just as itshould be, for I had accustomed myself to living always on twoplanes simultaneously, one conscious, which attempted tounderstand and could not, and one unconscious, which wanted toexpress something and could not formulate it any better than by adream.I dreamt that I was in an Arab city, and as in most such cities therewas a citadel, a casbah. The city was situated in a broad plain, andhad a wall all around it. The shape of the wall was square, and therewere four gates.The casbah in the interior of the city was surrounded by a widemoat (which is not the way it really is in Arab countries). I stoodbefore a wooden bridge leading over the water to a dark,horseshoe-shaped portal, which was open. Eager to see the citadelfrom the inside also, I stepped out on the bridge. When I was abouthalfway across it, a handsome, dark Arab of aristocratic, almostroyal bearing came toward me from the gate. I knew that this youthin the white burnoose was the resident prince of the citadel. Whenhe came up to me, he attacked me and tried to knock me down.We wrestled. In the struggle we crashed against the railing; it gaveway and both of us fell into the moat, where he tried to push myhead under water to drown me. No, I thought, this is going too far.And in my turn I pushed his head under water. I did so although I feltgreat admiration for him; but I did not want to let myself be killed. Ihad no intention of killing him; I wanted only to make himunconscious and incapable of fighting.

Then the scene of the dream changed, and he was with me in alarge vaulted octagonal room in the center of the citadel. The roomwas all white, very plain and beautiful. Along the light-coloredmarble walls stood low divans, and before me on the floor lay anopen book with black letters written in magnificent calligraphy onmilky-white parchment. It was not Arabic script; rather, it looked tome like the Uigurian script of West Turkestan, which was familiar tome from the Manichaean fragments from Turfan. I did not know thecontents, but nevertheless I had the feeling that this was "my book,"that I had written it. The young prince with whom I had just beenwrestling sat to the right of me on the floor. I explained to him thatnow that I had overcome him he must read the book. But heresisted. I placed my arm around his shoulders and forced him, witha sort of paternal kindness and patience, to read the book. I knewthat this was absolutely essential, and at last he yielded.In this dream, the Arab youth was the double of the proud Arab whohad ridden past us without a greeting. As an inhabitant of thecasbah he was a figuration of the self, or rather, a messenger oremissary of the self. For the casbah from which he came was aperfect mandala: a citadel surrounded by a square wall with fourgates. His attempt to kill me was an echo of the motif of Jacob'sstruggle with the angel; he was to use the language of the Bible likean angel of the Lord, a messenger of God who wished to kill menbecause he did not know them.Actually , the angel ought to have had his dwelling in me. But heknew only angelic truth and understood nothing about man.Therefore he first came forward as my enemy; however, I held myown against him. In the second part of the dream I was the masterof the citadel; he sat at my feet and had to learn to understand mythoughts, or rather, learn to know man.

Obviously, my encounter with Arab culture had struck me withoverwhelming force. The emotional nature of these unreflectivepeople who are so much closer to life than we are exerts a strongsuggestive influence upon those historical layers in ourselves whichwe have just overcome and left behind, or which we think we haveovercome. It is like the paradise of childhood from which weimagine we have emerged, but which at the slightest provocationimposes fresh defeats upon us. Indeed, our cult of progress is indanger of imposing on us even more childish dreams of the future,the harder it presses us to escape from the past.On the other hand, a characteristic of childhood is that, thanks to itsnaivete and unconsciousness, it sketches a more complete pictureof the self, of the whole man in his pure individuality, than adulthood.Consequently , the sight of a child or a primitive will arouse certainlongings in adult, civilized persons longings which relate to theunfulfilled desires and needs of those parts of the personality whichhave been blotted out of the total picture in favor of the adaptedpersona.In traveling to Africa to find a psychic observation post outside thesphere of the European, I unconsciously wanted to find that part ofmy personality which had become invisible under the influence andthe pressure of being European. This part stands in unconsciousopposition to myself, and indeed I attempt to suppress it. In keepingwith its nature, it wishes to make me unconscious (force me underwater) so as to kill me; but my aim is, through insight, to make itmore conscious, so that we can find a common modus vivendi. TheArab's dusky complexion marks him as a "shadow," but not thepersonal shadow, rather an ethnic one associated not with mypersona but with the totality of my personality, that is, with the self.As master of the casbah, he must be regarded as a kind of shadowof the self. The predominantly rationalistic European finds much thatis human alien to him, and he prides himself on this without realizing

that his rationality is won at the expense of his vitality, and that theprimitive part of his personality is consequently condemned to amore or less underground existence.The dream reveals how my encounter with North Africa affected me.First of all there was the danger that my European consciousnesswould be overwhelmed by an unexpectedly violent assault of theunconscious psyche. Consciously, I was not a bit aware of any suchsituation; on the contrary, I could not help feeling superior because Iwas reminded at every step of my Europeanism. That wasunavoidable; my being European gave me a certain perspective onthese people who were so differently constituted from myself, andutterly marked me off from them. But I was not prepared for theexistence of unconscious forces within myself which would take thepart of these strangers with such intensity, so that a violent conflictensued. The dream expressed this conflict in the symbol of anattempted murder.I was not to recognize the real nature of this disturbance until someyears later, when I stayed in tropical Africa. It had been, in fact, thefirst hint of "going black under the skin," a spiritual peril whichthreatens the uprooted European in Africa to an extent not fullyappreciated. "Where danger is, there is salvation also" these wordsof Holderlin often came to my mind in such situations. The salvationlies in our ability to bring the unconscious urges to consciousnesswith the aid of warning dreams. These dreams show that there issomething in us which does not merely submit passively to theinfluence of the unconscious, but on the contrary rushes eagerly tomeet it, identifying itself with the shadow. Just as a childhoodmemory can suddenly take possession of consciousness with solively an emotion that we feel wholly transported back to the originalsituation, so these seemingly alien and wholly different Arabsurroundings awaken an archetypal memory of an only too well

known prehistoric past which apparently we have entirely forgotten.We are remembering a potentiality of life which has beenovergrown by civilization, but which in certain places is still existent.If we were to relive it naively, it would constitute a relapse intobarbarism. Therefore we prefer to forget it. But should it appear tous again in the form of a conflict, then we should keep it in ourconsciousness and test the two possibilities against each other thelife we live and the one we have forgotten. For what has apparentlybeen lost does not come to the fore again without sufficient reason.In the living psychic structure, nothing takes place in a merelymechanical fashion; everything fits into the economy of the whole,relates to the whole. That is to say, it is all purposeful and hasmeaning. But because consciousness never has a view of thewhole, it usually cannot understand this meaning. We must thereforecontent ourselves for the time being with noting the phenomenonand hoping that the future, or further investigation, will reveal thesignificance of this clash with the shadow of the self. In any case, Idid not at the time have any glimmering of the nature of thisarchetypal experience, and knew still less about the historicalparallels. Y et though I did not then grasp the full meaning of thedream, it lingered in my memory, along with the liveliest wish to goto Africa again at the next opportunity. That wish was not to befulfilled for another five years.ii. AMERICA: THE PUEBLO INDIANS(Extract from an unpublished MS.)We always require an outside point to stand on, in order to applythe lever of criticism. This is especially so in psychology, where bythe nature of the material we are much more subjectively involvedthan in any other science. How, for example, can we becomeconscious of national peculiarities if we have never had theopportunity to regard our own nation from outside? Regarding it

from outside means regarding it from the standpoint of anothernation. To do so, we must acquire sufficient knowledge of theforeign collective psyche, and in the course of this process ofassimilation we encounter all those incompatibilities whichconstitute the national bias and the national peculiarity. Everythingthat irritates us about others can lead us to an understanding ofourselves. I understand England only when I see where I, as aSwiss, do not fit in. I understand Europe, our greatest problem, onlywhen I see where I as a European do not fit into the world. Throughmy acquaintance with many Americans, and my trips to and inAmerica, I have obtained an enormous amount of insight into theEuropean character; it has always seemed to me that there can benothing more useful for a European than some time or another tolook out at Europe from the top of a skyscraper. When Icontemplated for the first time the European spectacle from theSahara, surrounded by a civilization which has more or less thesame relationship to ours as Roman antiquity has to modern times,I became aware of how completely, even in America, I was stillcaught up and imprisoned in the cultural consciousness of the whiteman. The desire then grew in me to carry the historicalcomparisons still farther by descending to a still lower cultural level.On my next trip to the United States I went with a group of Americanfriends to visit the Indians of New Mexico, the city- building Pueblos."City ," however, is too strong a word. What they build are in realityonly villages; but their crowded houses piled one atop the othersuggest the word "city," as do their language and their wholemanner. There for the first time I had the good fortune to talk with anon-European, that is, to a non-white. He was a chief of the Taospueblos, an intelligent man between the ages of forty and fifty. Hisname was Ochwiay Biano (Mountain Lake). I was able to talk withhim as I have rarely been able to talk with a European. T o be sure,he was caught up in his world just as much as a European is in his,

but what a world it was! In talk with a European, one is constantlyrunning up on the sand bars of things long known but neverunderstood; with this Indian, the vessel floated freely on deep, alienseas. At the same time, one never knows which is more enjoyable:catching sight of new shores, or discovering new approaches toage-old knowledge that has been almost forgotten."See," Ochwiay Biano said, "how cruel the whites look. Their lipsare thin, their noses sharp, their faces furrowed and distorted byfolds. Their eyes have a staring expression; they are alwaysseeking something. What are they seeking? The whites alwayswant something; they are always uneasy and restless. We do notknow what they want. We do not understand them. We think thatthey are mad."I asked him why he thought the whites were all mad."They say that they think with their heads," he replied."Why of course. What do you think with?" I asked him in surprise."We think here," he said, indicating his heart.I fell into a long meditation. For the first time in my life, so it seemedto me, someone had drawn for me a picture of the real white man. Itwas as though until now I had seen nothing but sentimental,prettified color prints. This Indian had struck our vulnerable spot,unveiled a truth to which we are blind. I felt rising within me like ashapeless mist something unknown and yet deeply familiar. And outof this mist, image upon image detached itself: first Roman legionssmashing into the cities of Gaul, and the keenly incised features ofJulius Caesar, Scipio Africanus, and Pompey. I saw the Romaneagle on the North Sea and on the banks of the White Nile. Then Isaw St. Augustine transmitting the Christian creed to the Britons on

the tips of Roman lances, and Charlemagne's most glorious forcedconversions of the heathen; then the pillaging and murdering bandsof the Crusading armies. With a secret stab I realized thehollowness of that old romanticism about the Crusades. Thenfollowed Columbus, Cortes, and the other conquistadors who withfire, sword, torture, and Christianity came down upon even theseremote pueblos dreaming peacefully in the Sun, their Father. I saw,too, the peoples of the Pacific islands decimated by firewater,syphilis, and scarlet fever carried in the clothes the missionariesforced on them.It was enough. What we from our point of view call colonization,missions to the heathen, spread of civilization, etc., has anotherface the face of a bird of prey seeking with cruel intentness fordistant quarry a face worthy of a race of pirates and highwaymen.All the eagles and other predatory creatures that adorn our coats ofarms seem to me apt psychological representatives of our truenature.Something else that Ochwiay Biano said to me stuck in my mind. Itseems to me so intimately connected with the peculiar atmosphereof our interview that my account would be incomplete if I failed tomention it. Our conversation took place on the roof of the fifth storyof the main building. At frequent intervals figures of other Indianscould be seen on the roofs, wrapped in their woolen blankets, sunkin contemplation of the wandering sun that daily rose into a clearsky. Around us were grouped the low-built square buildings of air-dried brick (adobe), with the characteristic ladders that reach fromthe ground to the roof, or from roof to roof of the higher stories. (Inearlier, dangerous times the entrance used to be through the roof.)Before us the rolling plateau of T aos (about seven thousand feetabove sea level) stretched to the horizon, where several conicalpeaks (ancient volcanoes) rose to over twelve thousand feet.Behind us a clear stream purled past the houses, and on its

opposite bank stood a second pueblo of reddish adobe houses,built one atop the other toward the center of the settlement, thusstrangely anticipating the perspective of an American metropoliswith its skyscrapers in the center. Perhaps half an hour's journeyupriver rose a mighty isolated mountain, the mountain, which has noname. The story goes that on days when the mountain is wrappedin clouds the men vanish in that direction to perform mysteriousrites.The Pueblo Indians are unusually closemouthed, and in matters oftheir religion absolutely inaccessible. They make it a policy to keeptheir religious practices a secret, and this secret is so strictlyguarded that I abandoned as hopeless any attempt at directquestioning. Never before had I run into such an atmosphere ofsecrecy; the religions of civilized nations today are all accessible;their sacraments have long ago ceased to be mysteries. Here,however, the air was filled with a secret known to all thecommunicants, but to which whites could gain no access. Thisstrange situation gave me an inkling of Eleusis, whose secret wasknown to one nation and yet never betrayed. I understood whatPausanias or Herodotus felt when he wrote:"I am not permitted to name the name of that god." This was not, Ifelt, mystification, but a vital mystery whose betrayal might bringabout the downfall of the community as well as of the individual.Preservation of the secret gives the Pueblo Indian pride and thepower to resist the dominant whites. It gives him cohesion and unity;and I feel sure that the Pueblos as an individual community willcontinue to exist as long as their mysteries are not desecrated.It was astonishing to me to see how the Indian's emotions changewhen he speaks of his religious ideas. In ordinary life he shows adegree of self-control and dignity that borders on fatalisticequanimity. But when he speaks of things that pertain to his

mysteries, he is in the grip of a surprising emotion which he cannotconceal a fact which greatly helped to satisfy my curiosity. As I havesaid, direct questioning led to nothing. When, therefore, I wanted toknow about essential matters, I made tentative remarks andobserved my interlocutor's expression for those affectivemovements which are so very familiar to me. If I had hit onsomething essential, he remained silent or gave an evasive reply,but with all the signs of profound emotion; frequently tears would fillhis eyes. Their religious conceptions are not theories to them(which, indeed, would have to be very curious theories to evoketears from a man), but facts, as important and moving as thecorresponding external realities.As I sat with Ochwiay Biano on the roof, the blazing sun risinghigher and higher, he said, pointing to the sun, "Is not he whomoves there our father? How can anyone say differently? How canthere be another god? Nothing can be without the sun." Hisexcitement, which was already perceptible, mounted still higher; hestruggled for words, and exclaimed at last, "What would a man doalone in the mountains? He cannot even build his fire without him."I asked him whether he did not think the sun might be a fiery ballshaped by an invisible god. My question did not even arouseastonishment, let alone anger. Obviously it touched nothing withinhim; he did not even think my question stupid. It merely left him cold,I had the feeling that I had come upon an insurmountable wall. Hisonly reply was, "The sun is God. Everyone can see that."Although no one can help feeling the tremendous impress of thesun, it was a novel and deeply affecting experience for me to seethese mature, dignified men in the grip of an overmasteringemotion when they spoke of it.Another time I stood by the river and looked up at the mountains,

which rise almost another six thousand feet above the plateau. Iwas just thinking that this was the roof of the American continent,and that people lived here in the face of the sun like the Indians whostood wrapped in blankets on the highest roofs of the pueblo, muteand absorbed in the sight of the sun. Suddenly a deep voice,vibrant with suppressed emotion, spoke from behind me into my leftear: "Do you not think that all life comes from the mountain?" Anelderly Indian had come up to me, inaudible in his moccasins, andhad asked me this heaven knows how far-reaching question. Aglance at the river pouring down from the mountain showed me theoutward image that had engendered this conclusion. Obviously alllife came from the mountain, for where there is water, there is life.Nothing could be more obvious. In his question I felt a swellingemotion connected with the word "mountain," and thought of the taleof secret rites celebrated on the mountain. I replied, "Everyone cansee that you speak the truth".Unfortunately, the conversation was soon interrupted, and so I didnot succeed in attaining any deeper insight into the symbolism ofwater and mountain.I observed that the Pueblo Indians, reluctant as they were to speakabout anything concerning their religion, talked with great readinessand intensity about their relations with the Americans. "Why,"Mountain Lake said, "do the Americans not let us alone? Why dothey want to forbid our dances? Why do they make difficulties whenwe want to take our young people from school in order to lead themto the kiva (site of the rituals) , and instruct them in our religion? Wedo nothing to harm the Americans!" After a prolonged silence hecontinued, "The Americans want to stamp out our religion. Why canthey not let us alone? What we do, we do not only for ourselves butfor the Americans also. Y es, we do it for the whole world. Everyonebenefits by it."

I could observe from his excitement that he was alluding to someextremely important element of his religion. I therefore asked him:"Y ou think, then, that what you do in your religion benefits the wholeworld?" He replied with great animation, "Of course. If we did not doit, what would become of the world?" And with a significant gesturehe pointed to the sun.I felt that we were approaching extremely delicate ground here,verging on the mysteries of the tribe. "After all," he said, "we are apeople who live on the roof of the world; we are the sons of FatherSun, and with our religion we daily help our father to go across thesky. We do this not only for ourselves, but for the whole world. If wewere to cease practicing our religion, in ten years the sun would nolonger rise. Then it would be night forever".I then realized on what the "dignity," the tranquil composure of theindividual Indian, was founded. It springs from his being a son of thesun; his life is cosmologically meaningful, for he helps the father andpreserver of all life in his daily rise and descent. If we set againstthis our own self-justifications, the meaning of our own lives as it isformulated by our reason, we cannot help but see our poverty. Outof sheer envy we are obliged to smile at the Indians' naivete and toplume ourselves on our cleverness; for otherwise we woulddiscover how impoverished and down at the heels we are.Knowledge does not enrich us; it removes us more and more fromthe mythic world in which we were once at home by right of birth.If for a moment we put away all European rationalism and transportourselves into the clear mountain air of that solitary plateau, whichdrops off on one side into the broad continental prairies and on theother into the Pacific Ocean; if we also set aside our intimateknowledge of the world and exchange it for a horizon that seemsimmeasurable, and an ignorance of what lies beyond it, we willbegin to achieve an inner comprehension of the Pueblo Indian's

point of view. "All life comes from the mountain" is immediatelyconvincing to him, and he is equally certain that he lives upon theroof of an immeasurable world, closest to God. He above all othershas the Divinity's ear, and his ritual act will reach the distant sunsoonest of all. The holiness of mountains, the revelation of Y ahwehupon Sinai, the inspiration that Nietzsche was vouchsafed in theEngadine --all speak the same language. The idea, absurd to us,that a ritual act can magically affect the sun is, upon closerexamination, no less irrational but far more familiar to us than mightat first be assumed. Our Christian religion like every other,incidentally is permeated by the idea that special acts or a specialkind of action can influence God for example, through certain ritesor by prayer, or by a morality pleasing to the Divinity.The ritual acts of man are an answer and reaction to the action ofGod upon man; and perhaps they are not only that, but are alsointended to be "activating," a form of magic coercion. That manfeels capable of formulating valid replies to the overpoweringinfluence of God, and that he can render back something which isessential even to God, induces pride, for it raises the humanindividual to the dignity of a metaphysical factor. "God and us" evenif it is only an unconscious sous-entendu--this equation no doubtunderlies that enviable serenity of the Pueblo Indian. Such a man isin the fullest sense of the word in his proper place.iii. KENYA AND UGANDATout est bien sortant des mains de l'Auteur des choses--Rousseau. When I visited the Wembley Exhibition in London (1925), I wasdeeply impressed by the excellent survey of the tribes under Britishrule, and resolved to take a trip to tropical Africa in the near future.

In the autumn of that year I set out with two friends, an Englishmanand an American, for Mombassa. We traveled on a Woermansteamer, together with many young Englishmen going out to postsin various African colonies. It was evident from the atmosphereaboard ship that these passengers were not traveling for pleasure,but were entering upon their destiny.To  b e  s ur e ,  t he r e  wa s  a  g o o d  d e a l  o f  g a y e xub e r a nc e ,  b ut  t heserious undertone was also evident. As a matter of fact, I heard ofthe fate of several of my fellow voyagers even before my own returntrip. Several met death in the tropics in the course of the next twomonths. They died of tropical malaria, amoebic dysentery, andpneumonia. Among those who died was the young man who satopposite me at table. Another was Dr. Akley, who had made aname for himself as the founder of the Gorilla Reservation in CentralAfrica and whom I had met in New York shortly before this voyage.Mombassa remains in my memory as a humidly hot, European,Indian, and Negro settlement hidden in a forest of palms andmango trees. It has an extremely picturesque setting, on a naturalharbor, with an old Portuguese fort towering over it. We stayedthere two days, and left toward evening on a narrow-gauge railroadfor Nairobi in the interior, plunging almost immediately into thetropical night.Along the coastal strip we passed by numerous Negro villageswhere the people sat talking around tiny fires. Soon the train beganto climb. The settlements ceased, and the night became inky black.Gradually it turned cooler, and I fell asleep. When the first ray ofsunlight announced the onset of day, I awoke. The train, swathed ina red cloud of dust, was just making a turn around a steep red cliff.On a jagged rock above us a slim, brownish-black figure stoodmotionless, leaning on a long spear, looking down at the train.Beside him towered a gigantic candelabrum cactus.

I was enchanted by this sight it was a picture of something utterlyalien and outside my experience, but on the other hand a mostintense sentiment du deja vu. I had the feeling that I had alreadyexperienced this moment and had always known this world whichwas separated from me only by distance in time. It was as if I werethis moment returning to the land of my youth, and as if I knew thatdark-skinned man who had been waiting for me for five thousandyears.The feeling--tone of this curious experience accompanied methroughout my whole journey through savage Africa. I can recall onlyone other such recognition of the immemorially known.That was when I first observed a parapsychological phenomenon,together with my former chief, Professor Eugen Bleuler. BeforehandI had imagined that I would be dumfounded if I were to see sofantastic a thing. But when it happened, I was not surprised at all; Ifelt it was perfectly natural, something I could take for grantedbecause I had long since been acquainted with it.I could not guess 'what string within myself was plucked at the sightof that solitary dark hunter. I knew only that his world had been minefor countless millennia.Somewhat bemused, I arrived around noon in Nairobi, situated atan altitude of six thousand feet. There was a dazzling plethora oflight that reminded me of the glare of sunlight in the Engadine asoue comes up out of the winter fogs of the lowlands. T o myastonishment the swarm of "boys" assembled at the railroad stationwore the old-fashioned gray and white woolen ski caps which I hadseen worn or worn myself in the Engadine. They are highlyesteemed because the upturned rim can be let down like a visor inthe Alps, good protection against the icy wind; here, against the

blazing heat.From Nairobi we used a small Ford to visit the Athi Plains, a greatgame preserve. From a low hill in this broad savanna a magnificentprospect opened out to us. T o the very brink of the horizon we sawgigantic herds of animals: gazelle, antelope, gnu, zebra, warthog,and so on. Grazing, heads nodding, the herds moved forward likeslow rivers. There was scarcely any sound save the melancholy cryof a bird of prey. This was the stillness of the eternal beginning, theworld as it had always been, in the state of non-being; for until thenno one had been present to know that it was this world. I walkedaway from my companions until I had put them out of sight, andsavored the feeling of being entirely alone. There I was now, the firsthuman being to recognize that this was the world, but who did notknow that in this moment he had first really created it.There the cosmic meaning of consciousness becameoverwhelmingly clear to me. "What nature leaves imperfect, the artperfects," say the alchemists. Man, I, in an invisible act of creationput the stamp of perfection on the world by giving it objectiveexistence. This act we usually ascribe to the Creator alone, withoutconsidering that in so doing we view life as a machine calculateddown to the last detail, which, along with the human psyche, runs onsenselessly, obeying foreknown and predetermined rules. In such acheerless clockwork fantasy there is no drama of man, world, andGod; there is no "new day" leading to "new shores" but only thedreariness of calculated processes. My old Pueblo friend came tomy mind. He thought that the raison d'etre of his pueblo had been tohelp their father, the sun, to cross the sky each day. I had enviedhim for the fullness of meaning in that belief, and had been lookingabout without hope for a myth of our own. Now I knew what it was,and knew even more: that man is indispensable for the completionof creation; that, in fact, he himself is the second creator of theworld, who alone has given to the world its objective existence

without which, unheard, unseen, silently eating, giving birth, dying,heads nodding through hundreds of millions of years, it would havegone on in the profoundest night of non-being down to its unknownend. Human consciousness created objective existence andmeaning, and man found his indispensable place in the greatprocess of being.By the Uganda railroad, which was then being built, we traveled toits provisional terminus, Station Sigistifour (sixty-four). The boysunloaded our quantities of equipment. I sat down on a chop box, acrate containing provisions, each one a man's head- load, and lit apipe, meditating on the fact that here we had, as it were, reachedthe edge of the oikumene, the inhabited earth, from which trailsstretched endlessly over the continent. After a while an elderlyEnglishman, obviously a squatter, joined me, sat down, andlikewise took out a pipe. He asked where we were going. When Ioutlined our various destinations, he asked, "Is this the first time youhave been in Africa? I have been here for forty years.""Yes," I told him. "At least in this part of Africa"."Then may I give you a piece of advice? Y ou know, mister, this herecountry is not man's country, it's God's country. So if anything shouldhappen, just sit down and don't worry." Whereupon he rose andwithout another word was lost in the horde of Negroes swarmingaround us.His words struck me as somehow significant, and I tried to visualizethe psychological state from which they had sprung. Evidently theyrepresented the quintessence of his experience; not man but Godwas in command here in other words, not will and intention, butinscrutable design.I had not come to the end of my meditation when our two

automobiles were ready to set off. Our party piled in with thebaggage, eight men strong, and we held on as best we could. Theshaking I received for the next several hours left no room forreflection. It was much farther than I had thought to the nextsettlement; Kakamegas, seat of a D.C. (District Commissioner),headquarters of a small garrison of the African Rifles, and site of ahospital and fantastically enough a small insane asylum. Eveningapproached, and suddenly night had fallen. All at once, a tropicalstorm came up, with almost incessant flashes of lightning, thunder,and a cloudburst which instantly soaked us from head to foot andmade every brook a raging torrent.It was half an hour after midnight, with the sky beginning to clear,when we reached Kakamegas. We were exhausted, and the D.C.helpfully received us with whisky in his drawing room. A jolly and oh-so-welcome fire was burning in the fireplace. In the center of thehandsome room stood a large table with a display of Englishjournals. The place might easily have been a country house inSussex. In my tiredness I no longer knew whether I had beentransported from reality into a dream, or from a dream to reality.Then we had still to pitch our tents for the first time. Luckily, nothingwas missing.Next morning I awoke with a touch of feverish laryngitis, and had tostay in bed for a day. T o this circumstance I owe my memorableacquaintanceship with the "brain-fever bird," a creature remarkablefor being able to sing a correct scale, but leaving out the last noteand starting again from the beginning. T o listen to this when one isdown with a fever is to have one's nerves strained to the breakingpoint.Another feathered inhabitant of the banana plantations has a crywhich consists of two of the sweetest and most melodious flutetones with a third, frightful sour note for an ending. "What nature

leaves imperfect..." The song of the "bell bird" however, was one ofunalloyed beauty. When it sang, it was as though a bell were driftingalong the horizon.Next day, with the aid of the D.C., we rounded up our column ofbearers, which was supplemented by a military escort of threeAskaris. And now began the trek to Mt. Elgon, whose fourteen-thousand-foot crater wall we soon saw on the horizon. The track ledthrough relatively dry savanna covered with umbrella acacias. Thewhole district was densely covered with small, round tumuli betweensix and ten feet high old termite colonies.For travelers there were resthouses along the track round, grass-roofed, rammed-earth huts, open and empty. At night a burninglantern was placed in the entrance as protection against intruders.Our cook had no lantern; but as a compensation he had a miniaturehut all to himself, with which he was highly pleased. But it nearlyproved fatal to him. The previous day he had slaughtered in front ofhis hut a sheep that we had bought for five Uganda shillings, andhad prepared excellent mutton chops for our evening meal. Afterdinner, while we were sitting around the fire, smoking, we heardstrange noises in the distance. The sounds came closer. Theysounded now like the growling of bears, now like the barking andyapping of dogs; then again the sounds became shrill, like shrieksand hysterical laughter. My first impression was: This is like a comicturn at Barnum and Bailey's. Before long, however, the scenebecame more menacing: we were surrounded on all sides by ahuge pack of hungry hyenas who had obviously smelled the sheep'sblood. They performed an infernal concert, and in the glow of thefire their eyes could be seen glittering from the tall elephant grass.In spite of our lofty knowledge of the nature of hyenas, which arealleged not to attack man, we did not feel altogether sure ofourselves and suddenly a frightful human scream came from behind

the resthouse. We snatched up our arms (a nine-mm. Mannlicherrifle and a shotgun) and fired several rounds in the direction ofthose glittering lights. As we did so, our cook came rushing panic-stricken into our midst and babbled that a fizi had come into his hutand almost killed him. The whole camp was in an uproar. Theexcitement, it seemed, so frightened the pack of hyenas that theyquit the scene, protesting noisily. The bearers went on laughing fora long time, after which the rest of the night passed quietly, withoutfurther disturbance. Early next morning the local chief appeared witha gift of two chickens and a basketful of eggs. He implored us tostay another day to shoot the hyenas. The day before, he said, theyhad dragged out an old man asleep in his hut and eaten him. DeAfrica nihil certum!At daybreak roars of laughter began again in the boys' quarters. Itappeared that they were re-enacting the events of the night. One ofthem played the sleeping cook, and one of the soldiers played thecreeping hyena, approaching the sleeper with murderous intent.This playlet was repeated I don't know how many times, to the utterdelight of the audience.From then on the cook bore the nickname "Fizi." We three whitesalready had our "trade-marks." My friend, the Englishman, wascalled "Red Neck" to the native mind, all Englishmen had rednecks. The American, who sported an impressive wardrobe, wasknown as "bwana maredadi (the dapper gentleman). Because Ialready had gray hair at the time (I was then fifty), I was the "mzee"the old man, and was regarded as a hundred years old. Advancedage was rare in those parts; I saw very few white-haired men. Mzeeis also a title of honor and was accorded to me in my capacity ashead of the "Bugishu Psychological Expedition" an appellationimposed by the Foreign Office in London as a lucus a non lucendo.We did visit the Bugishus, but spent a much longer time with theElgonyis.

All in all, Negroes proved to be excellent judges of character. Oneof their avenues to insight lay in their talent for mimicry. They couldimitate with astounding accuracy the manner of expression, thegestures, the gaits of people, thus, to all intents and purposes,slipping into their skins. I found their understanding of the emotionalnature of others altogether surprising. I would always take the timeto engage in the long palavers for which, they had a pronouncedfondness. In this way I learned a great deal.Our traveling semi-officially proved advantageous, since in this waywe found it easier to recruit bearers, and we were also given amilitary escort. The latter was by no means superfluous, since wewere going to travel in territories that were not under white control.A corporal and two privates accompanied our safari to Mt Elgon.We could not help the chief by hunting the hyenas, and continued onour way after the adventure. The terrain sloped gently upward.Signs of T ertiary lava beds increased. We passed through gloriousstretches of jungle with huge Nandi flame trees flaunting their redblossoms. Enormous beetles and even larger brilliantly coloredbutterflies enlivened the clearings and the edges of the jungle.Branches were shaken by inquisitive monkeys as we advancedfurther into the bush. It was a paradisal world. Most of the way westill traversed flat savanna with deep red soil. We tramped mostlyalong the native trails which meandered in strikingly sharp turns.Our route led us into the Nandi region, and through the NandiForest, a sizable area of jungle. Without incident we reached aresthouse at the foot of Mt. Elgon, which had been towering higherand higher above our heads for days. Here the climb began, alonga narrow path. We were greeted by the local chief, who was the sonof the laibon, the medicine man. He rode a pony the only horse wehad so far seen. From him we learned that his tribe belonged to theMasai, but lived in isolation here on the slopes of Mt. Elgon.

There a letter awaited us from the governor of Uganda, requestingus to take under our protection an English lady who was on her wayback to Egypt via the Sudan. The governor was aware that we werefollowing the same itinerary, and since we had already met the ladyin Nairobi we knew that she would be a congenial companion.Moreover, we were under considerable obligation to the governorfor his having helped us in all sorts of ways.I mention this episode to suggest the subtle modes by which anarchetype influences our actions. We were three men; that was amatter of pure chance. I had asked another friend of mine to join us,which would have made a fourth. But circumstances had preventedhim from accepting. That sufficed to produce an unconscious orfated constellation: the archetype of the triad, which calls for thefourth to complete it, as we have seen again and again in thehistory of this archetype.Since I am inclined to accept chance when it comes my way , Iwelcomed the lady to our group of three men. Hardy and intrepid,she proved a useful counterpoise to our one-sided masculinity.When one of our party came down with a bad case of tropicalmalaria, we were grateful for the experience she had acquired as anurse during the First World War.After a few hours of climbing we reached a lovely large clearing,bisected by a clear, cool brook with a waterfall about ten feet inheight. The pool at the bottom of the waterfall became our bath. Ourcampsite was situated about three hundred yards away, on agentle, dry slope, shadowed by umbrella acacias. Nearby--that is,about fifteen minutes' walk away was a native kraal which consistedof a few huts and a boma--a yard surrounded by a hedge of wait-a-bit thorn. This kraal provided us with our water bearers, a womanand her two half-grown daughters, who were naked except for a belt

of cowries. They were chocolate-brown and strikingly pretty, withfine slim figures and an aristocratic leisureliness about theirmovements. It was a pleasure for me each morning to hear the softding-clang of their iron ankle rings as they came up from the brook,and soon afterward to see their swaying gait as they emerged fromthe tall yellow elephant grass, balancing the amphorae of water ontheir heads. They were adorned with ankle rings, brass braceletsand necklaces, earrings of copper or wood in the shape of smallspools. Their lower lips were pierced with either a bone or iron nail.They had very good manners, and always greeted us with shy,charming smiles.With a single exception, which I shall mention shortly, I never spoketo a native woman, this being what was expected of me. As inSouthern Europe, men speak to men, women to women. Anythingelse signifies love-making. The white who goes in for this not onlyforfeits his authority, but runs the serious risk of "going black." Iobserved several highly instructive examples of this. Quite often Iheard the natives pass judgment upon a certain white: "He is a badman." When I asked why, the reply was invariably, "He sleeps withour women."Among my Elgonyis, the men busied themselves with the cattle andwith hunting; the women were identified with the shamba, a field ofbananas, sweet potatoes, kaffir (grain sorghum), and maize. Theykept children, goats, and chickens in the same round hut in whichthe family lived. Their dignity and naturalness flow from their functionin the economy; they are intensely active business partners. Theconcept of equal rights for women is the product of an age in whichsuch partnership has lost its meaning. Primitive society is regulatedby an unconscious egoism and altruism; both attitudes are wiselygiven their due. This unconscious order breaks up at once if anydisturbance ensues which has to be remedied by a conscious act.

It gives me pleasure to recall one of my important informants onfamily relations among the Elgonyi. He was a strikingly handsomeyouth by the name of Gibroat the son of a chief, charming anddistinguished in manners, whose confidence I had evidently won. Tobe sure, he gladly accepted my cigarettes, but he was not greedyfor them, as the others were for all sorts of gifts. From time to timehe would pay me a gentlemanly visit and tell me all sorts ofinteresting things. I felt that he had something in mind, somerequest that he somehow could not voice. Not until we had knowneach other for some time did he astonish me by asking me to meethis family, I knew that he himself was still unmarried, and that hisparents were dead. The family in question was that of an eldersister; she was married as a second wife, and had four children.Gibroat very much wanted me to pay her a visit, so that she wouldhave the opportunity to meet me. Evidently she filled the place of amother in his life. I agreed, because I hoped in this social way toobtain some insight into native family life."Madame etait chez elle" she came out of the hut when we arrived,and greeted me with utter naturalness. She was a good-lookingwoman, middle-aged that is, about thirty. Aside from the obligatorycowrie belt, she wore arm and ankle rings, some copper ornamentshanging from the greatly extended ear lobe, and the skin of somesmall game animal over her breast. She had locked her four little"mtotos" in the hut; they peered out through cracks in the door,giggling excitedly. At my request she let them out; but it took sometime before they dared to emerge. She had the same excellentmanners as her brother, who was beaming joyfully at the success ofhis coup.We did not sit down, since there was nowhere to sit except on thedusty ground, which was covered with chicken droppings and goatpellets. The conversation moved in the conventional framework ofsemi-familial drawing-room talk, revolving around family, children,

house, and garden. Her elder co-wife, whose property bordered onhers, had six children. The boma of this "sister" was some eightyyards away. Approximately halfway between the two women's huts,at the apex of a triangle, stood the husband's hut, and behind that,about fifty yards away, a small hut occupied by the first wife'salready grown son. Each of the two women had her own shamba.My hostess was obviously proud of hers.I had the feeling that the confidence and self-assurance of hermanner were founded to a great extent upon her identity with herown wholeness, her private world made up of children, house, smalllivestock, shamba and last but not least her not-unattractivephysique. The husband was referred to only in an allusive way. Itseemed that he was sometimes here, sometimes not here. At themoment he was staying at some unknown place. My hostess wasplainly and unproblematically the embodiment of stability, averitable pied-a-terre for the husband. The question did not seem tobe whether or not he was there, but rather whether she was presentin her wholeness, providing a geomagnetic center for the husbandwho wandered over the land with his herds. What goes on in theinterior of these "simple" souls is not conscious, is thereforeunknown, and we can only deduce it from comparative evidence of"advanced" European differentiation.I asked myself whether the growing masculinization of the whitewoman is not connected with the loss of her natural wholeness(shamba, children, livestock, house of her own, hearth fire); whetherit is not a compensation for her impoverishment; and whether thefeminizing of the white man is not a further consequence. The morerational the polity, the more blurred is the difference between thesexes. The role homosexuality plays in modern society isenormous. It is partly the consequence of the mother-complex,partly a purposive phenomenon (prevention of reproduction).

My companions and I had the good fortune to taste the world ofAfrica, with its incredible beauty and its equally incredible suffering,before the end came. Our camp life proved to be one of theloveliest interludes in my life. I enjoyed the "divine peace" of a stillprimeval country. Never had I seen so clearly "man and the otheranimals" (Herodotus). Thousands of miles lay between me andEurope, mother of all demons. The demons could not reach mehere there were no telegrams, no telephone calls, no letters, novisitors. My liberated psychic forces poured blissfully back to theprimeval expanses.It was easy for us to arrange a palaver each morning with thenatives who squatted all day long around our camp and watchedour doings with never-fading interest. My headman, Ibrahim, hadinitiated me into the etiquette of the palaver. All the men (the womennever came near) had to sit on the ground. Ibrahim had obtained forme a small four-legged chiefs stool of mahogany on which I had tosit. Then I began with an address and set forth the shauri, that is, theagenda of the palaver. Most of the natives spoke a tolerable pidginSwahili; and I for my part would manage to speak to them bymaking ample use of a small dictionary. This little book was theobject of unwearying admiration. My limited vocabulary imposedupon me a needful simplicity. Often the conversation resembled anamusing game of guessing riddles, for which reason the palaversenjoyed great popularity. The sessions seldom lasted longer thanan hour or an hour and a half, because the men grew visibly tired,and would complain, with dramatic gestures, "Alas, we are sotired."I was naturally much interested in the natives' dreams, but at firstcould not get them to tell me any. I offered small rewards,cigarettes, matches, safety pins, and such things, which they wereeager to have. But nothing helped. I could never completely explaintheir shyness about telling dreams. I suspect the reason was fear

and distrust. It is well known that Negroes are afraid of beingphotographed; they fear that anyone who takes a picture of them isrobbing them of their soul, and perhaps they likewise fear that harmmay come to them from anyone who has knowledge of theirdreams. This, incidentally, did not apply to our boys, who werecoastal Somalis and Swahilis. They had an Arab dream book whichthey daily consulted during the trek. If they were in doubt about aninterpretation, they would actually come to me for advice. Theytermed me a "man of the Book" because of my knowledge of theKoran. To their minds, I was a disguised Mohammedan.One time we had a palaver with the laibon, the old medicine man.He appeared in a splendid cloak made of the skins of bluemonkeys a valuable article of display. When I asked him about hisdreams, he answered with tears in his eyes, "In old days the laibonshad dreams, and knew whether there is war or sickness or whetherrain comes and where the herds should be driven." His grandfather,too, had still dreamed. But since the whites were in Africa, he said,no one had dreams any more. Dreams were no longer neededbecause now the English knew everything!His reply showed me that the medicine man had lost his raisond'etre. The divine voice which counseled the tribe was no longerneeded because "the English know better." Formerly the medicineman had negotiated with the gods or the power of destiny, and hadadvised his people. He exerted great influence, just as in ancientGreece the word of the Pythia possessed the highest authority.Now the medicine man's authority was replaced by that of the D.C.The value of life now lay wholly in this world, and it seemed to meonly a question of time and of the vitality of the black race before theNegroes would become conscious of the importance of physicalpower.Far from being an imposing personality, our laibon was only a

somewhat tearful old gentleman. He was the living embodiment ofthe spreading disintegration of an undermined, outmoded,unrestorable world.On numerous occasions I brought the conversation around to thenumina, especially to rites and ceremonies. Concerning these, Ihad only a single piece of evidence. In front of an empty hut, in themiddle of a busy village street, I had seen a carefully swept spotseveral yards in diameter. In the center lay a cowrie belt, arm andankle rings, earrings, the shards of all sorts of pots, and a diggingstick. All that we were able to learn about this was the fact that awoman had died in this hut. Nothing whatsoever was said about afuneral.In the palaver the people assured me with considerable emphasisthat their neighbors to the west were "bad" people. If someone diedthere, the next village was informed, and in the evening the bodywas brought to the midpoint between the two villages. From theother side, presents of various sorts were brought to the same spot,and in the morning the corpse was no longer there. It was plainlyinsinuated that the other village devoured the dead. Such thingsnever happened among the Elgonyi, they said. To be sure, theirdead were laid out in the bush, where the hyenas took care of themin the course of the night. In point of fact we never found any signs ofburial of the dead.I was informed, however, that when a man dies, his body is placedon the floor in the middle of the hut. The laibon walks around thebody, sprinkling milk from a bowl on to the floor, murmuring, "Ayikadhista, adhista ayikr!I knew the meaning of these words from a memorable palaver thathad taken place earlier. At the end of that palaver an old man hadsuddenly exclaimed, "In the morning, when the sun comes, we go

out of the huts, spit into our hands, and hold them up to the sun." Ihad him show me the ceremony and describe it exactly. They heldtheir hands in front of their mouths, spat or blew vigorously, thenturned the palms upward toward the sun. I asked what this meant,why they blew or spat into their hands. My questioning was in vain."We've always done it," they said. It was impossible to obtain anyexplanation, and I realized that they actually knew only that they didit, not what they were doing. They themselves saw no meaning inthis action. But we, too, perform ceremonies without realizing whatwe are doing such as lighting Christmas tree candles, hiding Eastereggs, etc.The old man said that this was the true religion of all peoples, thatall Kevirondos, all Buganda, all tribes for as far as the eye couldsee from the mountain and endlessly farther, worshiped adhista thatis, the sun at the moment of rising. Only then was the sun mungu,God. The first delicate golden crescent of the new moon in thepurple of the western sky was also God. But only at that time;otherwise not.Evidently , the meaning of the Elgonyi ceremony was that an offeringwas being made to the sun divinity at the moment of its rising. If thegift was spittle, it was the substance which in the view of primitivescontains the personal mana, the power of healing, magic, and life. Ifit was breath, then it was roho--Arabic, ruch, Hebrew, ruach, Greek,pneuma wind and spirit. The act was therefore saying: I offer to Godmy living soul. It was a wordless, acted-out prayer which mightequally well be rendered: "Lord, into thy hands I commend myspirit."Besides adhista the Elgonyi we were further informed also venerateayik, the spirit who dwells in the earth and is a sheitan (devil). He isthe creator of fear, a cold wind who lies in wait for the nocturnaltraveler. The old man whistled a kind of Loki motif to convey vividly

how the ayik creeps through the tall, mysterious grass of the bush.In general the people asseverated that the Creator had madeeverything good and beautiful. He was beyond good and evil. Hewas m'zuri, that is, beautiful, and everything he did was m'zuri.When I asked: "But what about the wicked animals who kill yourcattle?" they said, "The lion is good and beautiful." "And yourhorrible diseases?" They said, "You lie in the sun and it is good."I was impressed by this optimism. But at six o'clock in the eveningthis optimism was suddenly over, as I soon discovered. Fromsunset on, it was a different world the dark world of ayik, of evil,danger, fear. The optimistic philosophy gave way to fear of ghostsand magical practices intended to secure protection from evil.Without any inner contradiction the optimism returned at dawn.It was a profoundly stirring experience for me to find, at the sourcesof the Nile, this reminder of the ancient Egyptian conception of thetwo acolytes of Osiris, Horus and Set. Here, evidently, was aprimordial African experience that had flowed down to the coasts ofthe Mediterranean along with the sacred waters of the Nile: adhista,the rising sun, the principle of light like Horus; ayik, the principle ofdarkness, the breeder of fear. In the simple rites performed for thedead, the laibons words and his sprinkling of milk unite theopposites; he simultaneously sacrifices to these two principles,which are of equal power and significance since the time of theirdominance, the rule of day and of night, each visibly lasts for twelvehours. The important thing, however, is the moment when, with thetypical suddenness of the tropics, the first ray of light shoots forthlike an arrow and night passes into life-filled light.The sunrise in these latitudes was a phenomenon that overwhelmedme anew every day. The drama of it lay less in the splendor of the

sun's shooting up over the horizon than in what happened afterward.I formed the habit of taking my camp stool and sitting under anumbrella acacia just before dawn. Before me, at the bottom of thelittle valley, lay a dark, almost black-green strip of jungle, with therim of the plateau on the opposite side of the valley towering aboveit. At first, the contrasts between light and darkness would beextremely sharp. Then objects would assume contour and emergeinto the light which seemed to fill the valley with a compactbrightness. The horizon above became radiantly white. Graduallythe swelling light seemed to penetrate into the very structure ofobjects, which became illuminated from within until at last theyshone translucently, like bits of colored glass. Everything turned toflaming crystal. The cry of the bell bird rang around the horizon. Atsuch moments I felt as if I were inside a temple. It was the mostsacred hour of the day. I drank in this glory with insatiable delight, orrather, in a timeless ecstasy.Near my observation point was a high cliff inhabited by bigbaboons. Every morning they sat quietly, almost motionless, on theridge of the cliff facing the sun, whereas throughout the rest of theday they ranged noisily through the forest, screeching andchattering. Like me, they seemed to be waiting for the sunrise. Theyreminded me of the great baboons of the temple of Abu Simbel inEgypt, which perform the gesture of adoration. They tell the samestory: for untold ages men have worshiped the great god whoredeems the world by rising out of the darkness as a radiant light inthe heavens.At that time I understood that within the soul from its primordialbeginnings there has been a desire for light and an irrepressibleurge to rise out of the primal darkness. When the great nightcomes, everything takes on a note of deep dejection, and everysoul is seized by an inexpressible longing for light. That is the pent-up feeling that can be detected in the eyes of primitives, and also in

the eyes of animals. There is a sadness in animals' eyes, and wenever know whether that sadness is bound up with the soul of theanimal or is a poignant message which speaks to us out of that stillunconscious existence. That sadness also reflects the mood ofAfrica, the experience of its solitudes. It is a maternal mystery , thisprimordial darkness. That is why the sun's birth in the morningstrikes the natives as so overwhelmingly meaningful. The moment inwhich light comes is God. That moment brings redemption, release.To  s a y t ha t  t he  s un i s  G o d  i s  t o  b l ur  a nd  f o r g e t  t he  a r c he t yp a lexperience of that moment. "We are glad that the night when thespirits are abroad is over now," the natives will say but that isalready a rationalization. In reality a darkness altogether differentfrom natural night broods over the land. It is the psychic primal nightwhich is the same today as it has been for countless millions ofyears. The longing for light is the longing for consciousness.Our blissful stay on Mt. Elgon neared its end. With heavy hearts westruck our tents, promising ourselves that we would return. I couldnot have brought myself to think that this would be the first and thelast time I would experience this unlooked-for glory. Since then, goldhas been discovered near Kakamegas, mining has begun, theMau-Mau movement has arisen among those innocent and friendlynatives, and we too have known a rude awakening from the dreamof civilization.We trekked along the southern slope of Mt. Elgon. Gradually thecharacter of the landscape changed. Higher mountains, coveredwith dense jungle, verged on the plain. The color of the inhabitantsgrew blacker; their bodies became clumsier and more massive,lacking the grace of the Masai. We were entering the territory of theBugishu, where we stayed some time in the resthouse ofBunambale. It is situated at a high altitude, and we had a splendidview of the broad Nile valley. From there we went on to Mbala,

where we were met by two Ford trucks that took us to Jinja, on LakeVictoria. We loaded our baggage onto a train of the narrow-gaugerailroad; once every two weeks it went to Lake Kioga. A paddle-wheel steamer whose boiler was fired by wood picked us up andafter a number of incidents brought us to Masindi Port. There wetransferred to a truck and so reached Masindi T own, which issituated on the plateau that separates Lake Kioga from AlbertNyanza.In a village on the way from Lake Albert to Rejdf in the Sudan wehad a very exciting experience. The local chief, a tall, still quiteyoung man,' appeared with his retinue. These were the blackestNegroes I had ever seen. There was something about the groupwhich was not exactly reassuring. The mamur[1] of Nimule hadgiven us three askaris as an escort, but I saw that they as well asour own boys did not feel at all easy. After all, they had only threecartridges each for their rifles. Their presence, consequently, was amerely symbolic gesture on the part of the government.When the chief proposed that he give a rigoma (dance) in theevening, I assented gladly. I hoped that the frolic would bring theirbetter nature to the fore. Night had fallen and we were all longing forsleep when we heard drums and horn blasts. Soon some sixty menappeared, martially equipped with flashing lances, clubs, andswords. They were followed at some distance by the women andchildren; even the infants were present, carried on their mothers'backs. This was obviously to be a1 El mamur, literally, prefect or governor.grand social occasion. In spite of the heat, which still hoveredaround ninety-three degrees, a big fire was kindled, and womenand children formed a circle around it. The men formed an outerring around them, as I had once observed a nervous herd of

elephants do. I did not know whether I ought to feel pleased oranxious about this mass display. I looked around for our boys andthe government soldiers they had vanished completely from thecamp! As a gesture of good will, I distributed cigarettes, matches,and safety pins. The men's chorus began to sing, vigorous,bellicose melodies, not unharmonious, and at the same time beganto swing their legs. The women and children tripped around the fire;the men danced toward it, waving their weapons, then drew backagain, and then advanced anew, amid savage singing, drumming,and trumpeting.It was a wild and stirring scene, bathed in the glow of the fire andmagical moonlight. My English friend and I sprang to our feet andmingled with the dancers. I swung my rhinoceros whip, the onlyweapon I had, and danced with them. By their beaming faces Icould see that they approved of our taking part. Their zealredoubled; the whole company stamped, sang, shouted, sweatingprofusely. Gradually the rhythm of the dance and the drummingaccelerated.In dances such as these, accompanied by such music, the nativeseasily fall into a virtual state of possession. That was the case now.As eleven o'clock approached, their excitement began to get out ofbounds, and suddenly the whole affair took on a highly curiousaspect. The dancers were being transformed into a wild horde, andI became worried about how it would end. I signed to the chief that itwas time to stop, and that he and his people ought to go to sleep.But he kept wanting "just another one."I remembered that a countryman of mine, one of the Sarasincousins, on an exploratory expedition in Celebes had been struckby a stray spear in the course of such a rigoma. And so,disregarding the chiefs pleas, I called the people together,distributed cigarettes, and then made the gesture of sleeping. Then

I swung my rhinoceros whip threateningly, but at the same timelaughing, and for lack of any better language I swore at them loudlyin Swiss German that this was enough and they must go home tobed and sleep now. It was apparent to the people that I was tosome extent pretending my anger, but that seems to have struckjust the right note. General laughter arose; capering, they scatteredin all directions and vanished into the night. For a long time weheard their jovial howls and drumming in the distance. At lastsilence fell, and we dropped into the sleep of exhaustion.Our trek came to an end in Rejaf on the Nile. There we stowed ourgear onto a paddle-wheel steamer which just succeeded in dockingat Rejaf; the water level was almost too low for it. By this time I wasfeeling burdened by all that I had experienced. A thousand thoughtswere whirling around me, and it became painfully clear to me thatmy capacity to digest new impressions was quickly approaching itslimits. The thing to do was to go over all my observations andexperiences and discover their inner connections. I had writtendown everything worth noting.During the entire trip my dreams stubbornly followed the tactic ofignoring Africa. They drew exclusively upon scenes from home, andthus seemed to say that they considered if it is permissible topersonify the unconscious processes to this extent the Africanjourney not as something real, but rather as a symptomatic orsymbolic act. Even the most impressive events of the trip wererigorously excluded from my dreams. Only once during the entireexpedition did I dream of a Negro. His face appeared curiouslyfamiliar to me, but I had to reflect a long time before I coulddetermine where I had met him before. Finally it came to me: hehad been my barber in Chattanooga, Tennessee! An AmericanNegro. In the dream he was holding a tremendous, red-hot curlingiron to my head, intending to make my hair kinky that is, to give meNegro hair. I could already feel the painful heat, and awoke with a

sense of terror.I took this dream as a warning from the unconscious; it was sayingthat the primitive was a danger to me. At that time I was obviouslyall too close to "going black". I was suffering an attack of sandflyfever which probably reduced my psychic resistance. In order torepresent a Negro threatening me, my unconscious had invoked atwelve-year-old memory of my Negro barber in America, just inorder to avoid any reminder of the present.This curious behavior of my dreams corresponds, incidentally, to aphenomenon which was noted during the First World War. Soldiersin the field dreamt far less of the war than of their homes. Militarypsychiatrists considered it a basic principle that a man should bepulled out of the front lines when he started dreaming too much ofwar scenes, for that meant he no longer possessed any psychicdefenses against the impressions from outside.Parallel to my involvement with this demanding African environment,an interior line was being successfully secured within my dreams.The dreams dealt with my personal problems. The only thing I couldconclude from this was that my European personality must under allcircumstances be preserved intact.To  m y a s t o ni s hm e nt ,  t he  s us p i c i o n d a wne d  o n m e  t ha t  I ha dundertaken my African adventure with the secret purpose ofescaping from Europe and its complex of problems, even at the riskof remaining in Africa, as so many before me had done, and as somany were doing at this very time. The trip revealed itself as less aninvestigation of primitive psychology ("Bugishu PsychologicalExpedition," B.P.E., black letters on the chop boxes!) than aprobing into the rather embarrassing question: What is going tohappen to Jung the psychologist in the wilds of Africa? This was aquestion I had constantly sought to evade, in spite of my intellectual

intention to study the European's reaction to primitive conditions. Itbecame clear to me that this study had been not so much anobjective scientific project as an intensely personal one, and thatany attempt to go deeper into it touched every possible sore spot inmy own psychology. I had to admit to myself that it was scarcely theWembley Exhibition which had begotten my decision to travel, butrather the fact that the atmosphere had become too highly chargedfor me in Europe.Amid such thoughts I glided on the peaceful waters of the Niletoward the north toward Europe, toward the future. The voyageended at Khartoum. There Egypt began. And thus I fulfilled mydesire and my plan to approach this cultural realm not from thewest, from the direction of Europe and Greece, but from the south,from the sources of the Nile. I was less interested in the complexAsiatic elements in Egyptian culture than in the Hamitic contribution.By following the geographical course of the Nile, and hence thestream of time, I could find out something about that for myself. Mygreatest illumination in this respect had been my discovery of theHorus principle among the Elgonyi. That whole episode, and all thatit meant, was dramatically called to mind again when I saw thesculptured cynocephali (dog-faced baboons) of Abu Simbel, thesouthern gate of Egypt.The myth of Horus is the age-old story of the newly risen divine light.It is a myth which must have been told after human culture that is,consciousness had for the first time released men from thedarkness of prehistoric times. Thus the journey from the heart ofAfrica to Egypt became, for me, a kind of drama of the birth of light.That drama was intimately connected with me, with my psychology. Irealized this, but felt incapable of formulating it in words. I had notknown in advance what Africa would give me; but here lay thesatisfying answer, the fulfilling experience. It was worth more to methan any ethnological yield would have been, any collection of

weapons, ornaments, pottery, or hunting trophies. I had wanted toknow how Africa would affect me, and I had found out.iv. INDIA [2]My journey to India, in 1938, was not taken on my own initiative. Itarose out of an invitation from the British Government of India totake part in the celebrations connected with the twenty-fifthanniversary of the University of Calcutta.By that time I had read a great deal about Indian philosophy andreligious history, and was deeply convinced of the value of2 On his return from India, Jung contributed two articles to themagazine Asia (New Y ork, January and February issues, 1939):"The Dreamlike World of India," and "What India Can T each Us."They are included in Civilization in Transition (CW 10). A. J.Oriental wisdom. But I had to travel in order to form my ownconclusions, and remained within myself like a homunculus in theretort. India affected me like a dream, for I was and remained insearch of myself, of the truth peculiar to myself.The journey formed an intermezzo in the intensive study ofalchemical philosophy on which I was engaged at the time. This hadso strong a grip upon me that I took along the first volume of theTheatrum Chemicum of 1602, which contains the principal writingsof Gerardus Dorneus. In the course of the voyage I studied the bookfrom beginning to end. Thus it was that this material belonging tothe fundamental strata of European thought was constantlycounterpointed by my impressions of a foreign mentality andculture. Both had emerged from original psychic experiences of theunconscious, and therefore had produced the same, similar, or atleast comparable insights.

India gave me my first direct experience of an alien, highlydifferentiated culture. Altogether different elements had ruled myCentral African journey; culture had not predominated. As for NorthAfrica, I had never had the opportunity there to talk with a personcapable of putting his culture into words. In India, however, I had thechance to speak with representatives of the Indian mentality, and tocompare it with the European. I had searching talks with S.Subramanya Iyer, the guru of the Maharajah of Mysore, whoseguest I was for some time; also with many others, whose namesunfortunately have escaped me. On the other hand, I studiouslyavoided all so-called "holy men." I did so because I had to make dowith my own truth, not accept from others what I could not attain onmy own. I would have felt it as a theft had I attempted to learn fromthe holy men and to accept their truth for myself. Neither in Europecan I make any borrowings from the East, but must shape my lifeout of myself out of what my inner being tells me, or what naturebrings to me.In India I was principally concerned with the question of thepsychological nature of evil. I had been very much impressed by theway this problem is integrated in Indian spiritual life, and I saw it in anew light. In a conversation with a cultivated Chinese I was alsoimpressed, again and again, by the fact that these people are ableto integrate so-called "evi!" without 'losing face." In the West wecannot do this. For the Oriental the problem of morality does notappear to take first place, as it does for us. T o the Oriental, goodand evil are meaningfully contained in nature, and are merelyvarying degrees of the same thing.I saw that Indian spirituality contains as much of evil as of good. TheChristian strives for good and succumbs to evil; the Indian feelshimself to be outside good and evil, and seeks to realize this stateby meditation or yoga. My objection is that, given such an attitude,

neither good nor evil takes on any real outline, and this produces acertain stasis. One does not really believe in evil, and one does notreally believe in good. Good or evil are then regarded at most asmy good or my evil, as whatever seems to me good or evil whichleaves us with the paradoxical statement that Indian spiritualitylacks both evil and good, or is so burdened by contradictions that itneeds nirdvandva, the liberation from opposites and from the tenthousand things.The Indian's goal is not moral perfection, but the condition ofnirdvandva. He wishes to free himself from nature; in keeping withthis aim, he seeks in meditation the condition of imagelessnessand emptiness. I, on the other hand, wish to persist in the state oflively contemplation of nature and of the psychic images. I want tobe freed neither from human beings, nor from myself, nor fromnature; for all these appear to me the greatest of miracles. Nature,the psyche, and life appear to me like divinity unfolded and whatmore could I wish for? T o me the supreme meaning of Being canconsist only in the fact that it is, not that it is not or is no longer.To  m e  t he r e  i s  no  l i b e r a t i o n a  t o ut  p r i x.  I c a nno t  b e  l i b e r a t e d  f r o manything that I do not possess, have not done or experienced. Realliberation becomes possible for me only when I have done all that Iwas able to do, when I have completely devoted myself to a thingand participated in it to the utmost. If I withdraw from participation, Iam virtually amputating the corresponding part of my psyche.Naturally, there may be good reasons for my not immersing myselfin a given experience. But then I am forced to confess my inability ,and must know that I may have neglected to do something of vitalimportance. In this way I make amends for the lack of a positive actby the clear knowledge of my incompetence.A man who has not passed through the inferno of his passions hasnever overcome them. They then dwell in the house next door, and

at any moment a flame may dart out and set fire to his own house.Whenever we give up, leave behind, and forget too much, there isalways the danger that the things we have neglected will return withadded force.In Konarak (Orissa) I met a pandit who obligingly offered to comewith me on my visit to the temple and the great temple car. Thepagoda is covered from base to pinnacle with exquisitely obscenesculptures. We talked for a long time about this extraordinary fact,which he explained to me as a means to achieve spiritualization. Iobjected pointing to a group of young peasants who were standingopen-mouthed before the monument, admiring these splendors thatsuch young men were scarcely undergoing spiritualization at themoment, but were much more likely having their heads filled withsexual fantasies. Whereupon he replied, "But that is just the point.How can they ever become spiritualized if they do not first fulfill theirkarma? These admittedly obscene images are here for the verypurpose of recalling to the people their dharma [law]; otherwisethese unconscious fellows might forget it."I thought it an odd notion that young men might forget their sexuality,like animals out of rutting time. My sage, however, resolutelymaintained that they were as unconscious as animals and actuallyin need of urgent admonishments. T o this end, he said, before theyset foot inside the temple they were reminded of their dharma bythe exterior decorations; for unless they were made conscious oftheir dharma and fulfilled it, they could not partake of spiritualization.As we entered through the gate of the temple, my companionpointed to the two "temptresses," statues of two dancing girls withseductively curved hips who smilingly greeted all who entered. "Doyou see these two dancing girls?" he said. "Their meaning is thesame. Naturally, this does not apply to people like you and me, forwe have attained to a level of consciousness which is above this

sort of thing. But for these peasant boys it is an indispensableinstruction and admonishment."When we left the temple and were walking down a lingam lane, hesuddenly said, "Do you see these stones? Do you know what theymean? I will tell you a great secret." I was astonished, for I thoughtthat the phallic nature of these monuments was known to everychild. But he whispered into my ear with the greatest seriousness,"These stones are man's private parts".I had expected him to tellme that they signified the great god Shiva. I looked at himdumfounded, but he only nodded self- importantly , as if to say , "Y es,that is how it is. No doubt you in your European ignorance wouldnever have thought so!" When I told this story to Heinrich Zimmer,he exclaimed in delight, "At last I have heard something real aboutIndia for a change!"When I visited the stupas of Sanchi, where Buddha delivered hisfire sermon, I was overcome by a strong emotion of the kind thatfrequently develops in me when I encounter a thing, person, or ideaof whose significance I am still unconscious. The stupas aresituated on a rocky hill whose peak can be reached by a pleasantpath of great stone slabs laid down through a green meadow. Thestupas are tombs or containers of relics, hemispherical in shape,like two gigantic rice bowls placed one on top of the other(concavity upon concavity), according to the prescripts of theBuddha himself in the Maha-Parinibbana-Sutta. The British havedone their restoration work in a most respectful spirit. The largest ofthese buildings is surrounded by a wall which has four elaborategates. Y ou come in by one of these and the path turns to the left,then leads into a clockwise circumambulation around the stupa. Atthe four cardinal points stand statues of the Buddha. When youhave completed one circumambulation, you enter a second, highercircuit which runs in the same direction. The distant prospect overthe plain, the stupas themselves, the temple ruins, and the solitary

stillness of this holy site held me in a spell. I took leave of mycompanion and submerged myself in the overpowering mood of theplace.After a while I heard rhythmic gong tones approaching from thedistance. A group of Japanese pilgrims came marching up onebehind the other, each striking a small gong. They were beating outthe rhythm of the age-old prayer Om mani padme hum, the stroke ofthe gong falling upon the hum. Outside the stupas they bowed low,then passed through the gate. There they bowed again before thestatue of the Buddha, intoning a chorale-like song. They completedthe double circumambulation, singing a hymn before each statue ofthe Buddha. As I watched them, my mind and spirit were with them,and something within me silently thanked them for having sowonderfully come to the aid of my inarticulate feelings.The intensity of my emotion showed that the hill of Sanchi meantsomething central to me. A new side of Buddhism was revealed tome there. I grasped the life of the Buddha as the reality of the selfwhich had broken through and laid claim to a personal life. ForBuddha, the self stands above all gods, a unus mundus whichrepresents the essence of human existence and of the world as awhole. The self embodies both the aspect of intrinsic being and theaspect of its being, known, without which no world exists. Buddhasaw and grasped the cosmogonic dignity of human consciousness;for that reason he saw clearly that if a man succeeded inextinguishing this light, the world would sink into nothingness.Schopenhauer's great achievement lay in his also recognizing this,or rediscovering it independently.Christ like Buddha is an embodiment of the self, but in an altogetherdifferent sense. Both stood for an overcoming of the world: Buddhaout of rational insight; Christ as a foredoomed sacrifice. InChristianity more is suffered, in Buddhism more is seen and done.

Both paths are right, but in the Indian sense Buddha is the morecomplete human being. He is a historical personality, and thereforeeasier for men to understand. Christ is at once a historical man andGod, and therefore much more difficult to comprehend. At bottomhe was not comprehensible even to himself; he knew only that hehad to sacrifice himself, that this course was imposed upon himfrom within. His sacrifice happened to him like an act of destiny.Buddha lived out his life and died at an advanced age, whereasChrist's activity as Christ probably lasted no more than a year.Later, Buddhism underwent the same transformation asChristianity: Buddha became, as it were, the image of thedevelopment of the self; he became a model for men to imitate,whereas actually he had preached that by overcoming the Nidana-chain every human being could become an illuminate, a buddha.Similarly , in Christianity , Christ is an exemplar who dwells in everyChristian as his integral personality . But historical trends led to theimitatio Christi, whereby the individual does not pursue his owndestined road to wholeness, but attempts to imitate the way takenby Christ. Similarly in the East, historical trends led to a devoutimitation of the Buddha. That Buddha should have become a modelto be imitated was in itself a weakening of his idea, just as theimitatio Christi was a forerunner of the fateful stasis in the evolutionof the Christian idea. As Buddha, by virtue of his insight, was far inadvance of the Brahma gods, so Christ cried out to the Jews, "Y ouare gods" (John 10:34) ; but men were incapable of understandingwhat he meant. Instead we find that the so-called Christian West, farfrom creating a new world, is moving with giant strides toward thepossibility of destroying the world we have. [3]India honored me with three doctorates, from Allahabad, Benares,and Calcutta representatives of Islam, of Hinduism, and of British-Indian medicine and science. It was a little too much of a goodthing, and I needed a retreat. A ten-day spell in the hospital offered

it to me, for in Calcutta I finally came down with dysentery . This wasa blessed island in the wild sea of new impressions, and I found aplace to stand on from which I could contemplate the ten thousandthings and their bewildering turmoil.When I returned to the hotel, in tolerably good health, I had a dreamso characteristic that I wish to set it down here. I found myself, with alarge number of my Zurich friends and acquaintances, on anunknown island, presumably situated not far off the coast ofsouthern England. It was small and almost uninhabited. The islandwas narrow, a strip of land about twenty miles long, running in anorth-south direction. On the rocky coast at the southern end of theisland was a medieval castle.3 On the problem of the imitatio, cf. Psychology and Alchemy, Part I (CW12).We stood in its courtyard, a group of sightseeing tourists. Before usrose an imposing 'belfroi', through whose gate a wide stonestaircase was visible. We could just manage to see that itterminated above in a columned hall. This hall was dimly illuminatedby candlelight. I understood that this was the castle of the Grail, andthat this evening there would be a "celebration of the Grail" here.This information seemed to be of a secret character, for a Germanprofessor among us, who strikingly resembled old Mommsen, knewnothing about it. I talked most animatedly with him, and wasimpressed by his learning and sparkling intelligence. Only one thingdisturbed me: he spoke constantly about a dead past and lecturedvery learnedly on the relationship of the British to the Frenchsources of the Grail story. Apparently he was not conscious of themeaning of the legend, nor of its living presentness, whereas I wasintensely aware of both. Also, he did not seem to perceive ourimmediate, actual surroundings, for he behaved as though he werein a classroom, lecturing to his students. In vain I tried to call his

attention to the peculiarity of the situation. He did not see the stairsor the festive glow in the hall.I looked around somewhat helplessly, and discovered that I wasstanding by the wall of a tall castle; the lower portion of the wall wascovered by a kind of trellis, not made of the usual wood, but of blackiron artfully formed into a grapevine com- plete with leaves, twiningtendrils, and grapes. At intervals of six feet on the horizontalbranches were tiny houses, likewise of iron, like birdhouses.Suddenly I saw a movement in the foliage; at first it seemed to bethat of a mouse, but then I saw distinctly a tiny, iron, hooded gnome,a cucullatus, scurrying from one little house to the next. "Well," Iexclaimed in astonishment to the professor, "now look at that, willyou..."At that moment a hiatus occurred, and the dream changed. We--thesame company as before, but without the professor-- were outsidethe castle, in a treeless, rocky landscape. I knew that somethinghad to happen, for the Grail was not yet in the castle and still had tobe celebrated that same evening. It was said to be in the northernpart of the island, hidden in a small, uninhabited house, the onlyhouse there. I knew that it was our task to bring the Grail to thecastle. There were about six of us who set out and trampednorthward.After several hours of strenuous hiking, we reached the narrowestpart of the island, and I discovered that the island was actuallydivided into two halves by an arm of the sea. At the smallest part ofthis strait the width of the water was about a hundred yards. The sunhad set, and night descended. Wearily, we camped on the ground.The region was unpopulated and desolate; far and wide there wasnot a tree or shrub, nothing but grass and rocks. There was nobridge, no boat. It was very cold; my companions fell asleep, oneafter the other. I considered what could be done, and came to the

conclusion that I alone must swim across the channel and fetch theGrail. I took off my clothes. At that point I awoke.Here was this essentially European dream emerging when I hadbarely worked my way out of the overwhelming mass of Indianimpressions. Some ten years before, I had discovered that in manyplaces in England the myth of the Grail was still a living thing, inspite of all the scholarship that has accumulated around thistradition. This fact had impressed me all the more when I realizedthe concordance between this poetic myth and what alchemy had tosay about the unum vas, the una medicina, and the unus lapis.Myths which day has forgotten continue to be told by night, andpowerful figures which consciousness has reduced to banality andridiculous triviality are recognized again by poets and propheticallyrevived; therefore they can also be recognized "in changed form" bythe thoughtful person. The great ones of the past have not died, aswe think; they have merely changed their names. "Small and slight,but great in might," the veiled Kabir enters a new house.Imperiously, the dream wiped away all the intense impressions ofIndia and swept me back to the too-long-neglected concerns of theOccident, which had formerly been expressed in the quest for theHoly Grail as well as in the search for the philosophers' stone. I wastaken out of the world of India, and reminded that India was not mytask, but only a part of the way --admittedly a significant one whichshould carry me closer to my goal. It was as though the dream wereasking me, "What are you doing in India? Rather seek for yourselfand your fellows the healing vessel, the servator mundi, which youurgently need. For your state is perilous; you are all in imminentdanger of destroying all that centuries have built up."Ceylon, the last stage of my journey , struck me as no longer India;there is already something of the South Seas about it, and a touchof paradise, in which one cannot linger too long. Colombo is a busy

international port where every day between five and six o'clock amassive downpour descends from a clear sky. We soon left itbehind and headed for the hilly country of the interior. There Kandy,the old royal city, is swathed in a fine mist whose tepid humiditysustains a luxuriant vegetation. The Dalada-Maligawa T emple,which contains the relic of the Holy Tooth (of Buddha), is small, butradiates a special charm. I spent a considerable time in its library,talking with the monks, and looking at the texts of the Buddhistcanon engraved on silver leaves.There I witnessed a memorable evening ceremony. Young men andgirls poured out enormous mounds of jasmine flowers in front of thealtars, at the same time singing a prayer under their breath: amantram. I thought they were praying to Buddha, but the monk whowas guiding me explained, "No, Buddha is no more; He is innirvana; we cannot pray to him. They are singing: 'This life istransitory as the beauty of these flowers. May my God [4] share withme the merit of this offering.' "As a prelude to the ceremony a one-hour drum concert wasperformed in the mandapam, or what in Indian temples is called thehall of waiting. There were five drummers; one stood in each cornerof the square hall, and the fifth, a young man, stood in the middle.He was the soloist, and a very fine drummer. Naked to the waist, hisdark-brown trunk glistening, with a red girdle, white shoka (a longskirt reaching to the feet), and white turban, arms covered withshining bracelets, he stepped up to the golden Buddha, bearing adouble drum, "to sacrifice the music." There, with beautifulmovements of body and arms, he drummed alone a strangemelody, artistically perfect. I watched4 God = deva = guardian angel.him from behind; he stood in front of the entrance to the mandapam,

which was covered with little oil lamps. The drum speaks theancient language of the belly and solar plexus; the belly does not"pray" but engenders the "meritorious" mantram or meditativeutterance. It is therefore not adoration of a non-existent Buddha, butone of the many acts of self-redemption performed by theawakened human being.To wa r d  t he  b e g i nni ng  o f  s p r i ng  I s e t  o ut  o n m y ho m e wa r d  vo ya g e ,with such a plethora of impressions that I did not have any desire toleave the ship to see Bombay. Instead, I buried myself in my Latinalchemical texts. But India did not pass me by without a trace; it lefttracks which lead from one infinity into another infinity.v. Ravenna And RomeEven on the occasion of my first visit to Ravenna in 1913, the tombof Galla Placidia seemed to me significant and unusuallyfascinating. The second time, twenty years later, I had the samefeeling. Once more I fell into a strange mood in the tomb of GallaPlacidia; once more I was deeply stirred. I was there with anacquaintance, and we went directly from the tomb into theBaptistery of the Orthodox.Here, what struck me first was the mild blue light that filled the room;yet I did not wonder about this at all. I did not try to account for itssource, and so the wonder of this light without any visible source didnot trouble me. I was somewhat amazed because, in place of thewindows I remembered having seen on my first visit, there werenow four great mosaic frescoes of incredible beauty which, itseemed, I had entirely forgotten. I was vexed to find my memory sounreliable. The mosaic on the south side represented the baptismin the Jordan; the second picture, on the north, was of the passageof the Children of Israel through the Red Sea; the third, on the east,soon faded from my memory. It might have shown Naaman being

cleansed of leprosy in the Jordan; there was a picture on this themein the old Merian Bible in my library , which was much like themosaic.The fourth mosaic, on the west side of the baptistery, was the mostimpressive of all. We looked at this one last. It represented Christholding out his hand to Peter, who was sinking beneath the waves.We stopped in front of this mosaic for at least twenty minutes anddiscussed the original ritual of baptism, especially the curiousarchaic conception of it as an initiation connected with real peril ofdeath. Such initiations were often connected with the peril of deathand so served to express the archetypal idea of death and rebirth.Baptism had originally been a real submersion which at leastsuggested the danger of drowning.I retained the most distinct memory of the mosaic of Peter sinking,and to this day can see every detail before my eyes: the blue of thesea, individual chips of the mosaic, the inscribed scrollsproceeding from the mouths of Peter and Christ, which I attemptedto decipher. After we left the baptistery, I went promptly to Alinari tobuy photographs of the mosaics, but could not find any. Time waspressing this was only a short visit and so I postponed the purchaseuntil later. I thought I might order the pictures from Zurich.When I was back home, I asked an acquaintance who was going toRavenna to obtain the pictures for me. He could not locate them, forhe discovered that the mosaics I had described did not exist.Meanwhile, I had already spoken at a seminar about the originalconception of baptism, and on this occasion had also mentionedthe mosaics that I had seen in the Baptistery of the Orthodox. [5]The memory of those pictures is still vivid to me. The lady who hadbeen there with me long refused to believe that what she had "seenwith her own eyes" had not existed.

As we know, it is very difficult to determine whether, and to whatextent, two persons simultaneously see the same thing. In this case,however, I was able to ascertain that at least the main features ofwhat we both saw had been the same.This experience in Ravenna is among the most curious events inmy life. It can scarcely be explained. A certain light may possibly becast on it by an incident in the story of Empress5 Tantra Yoga Seminar, 1932.Galla Placidia (d. 450). During a stormy crossing from Byzantium toRavenna in the worst of winter, she made a vow that if she camethrough safely, she would build a church and have the perils of thesea represented in it. She kept this vow by building the basilica ofSan Giovanni in Ravenna and having it adorned with mosaics. Inthe early Middle Ages, San Giovanni, together with its mosaics,was destroyed by fire; but in the Ambrosiana in Milan is still to befound a sketch representing Galla Placidia in a boat.I had, from the first visit, been personally affected by the figure ofGalla Placidia, and had often wondered how it must have been forthis highly cultivated, fastidious woman to live at the side of abarbarian prince. Her tomb seemed to me a final legacy throughwhich I might reach her personality. Her fate and her whole beingwere vivid presences to me; with her intense nature, she was asuitable embodiment for my anima. [6]The anima of a man has a strongly historical character. As apersonification of the unconscious she goes back into prehistory,and embodies the contents of the past. She provides the individualwith those elements that he ought to know about his pre-history. Tothe individual, the anima is all life that has been in the past and isstill alive in him. In comparison to her I have always felt myself to be

a barbarian who really has no history like a creature just sprung outof nothingness, with neither a past nor a future.In the course of my confrontation with the anima I had actually had abrush with those perils which I saw represented in the mosaics. Ihad come close to drowning. The same thing happened to me as toPeter, who cried for help and was rescued by Jesus. What hadbeen the fate of Pharaoh's army could have been mine. Like Peterand like Naaman, I came away unscathed, and the integration of theunconscious contents made an essential contribution to thecompletion of my personality.6 Jung himself explained the vision as a momentary new creationby the unconscious, arising out of his thoughts about archetypalinitiation. The immediate cause of the concretization lay , in hisopinion, in a projection of his anima upon Galla Placidia. A. J.What happens within oneself when one integrates previouslyunconscious contents with the consciousness is something whichcan scarcely be described in words. It can only be experienced. It isa subjective affair quite beyond discussion; we have a particularfeeling about ourselves, about the way we are, and that is a factwhich it is neither possible nor meaningful to doubt. Similarly, weconvey a particular feeling to others, and that too is a fact thatcannot be doubted. So far as we know, there is no higher authoritywhich could eliminate the probable discrepancies between all theseimpressions and opinions. Whether a change has taken place asthe result of integration, and what the nature of that change is,remains a matter of subjective conviction. T o be sure, it is not a factwhich can be scientifically verified and therefore finds no place inan official view of the world. Y et it nevertheless remains a fact whichis in practice uncommonly important and fraught withconsequences. Realistic psychotherapists, at any rate, andpsychologists interested in therapy, can scarcely afford to overlook

facts of this sort.Since my experience in the baptistery in Ravenna, I know withcertainty that something interior can seem to be exterior, and thatsomething exterior can appear to be interior. The actual walls of thebaptistery, though they must have been seen by my physical eyes,were covered over by a vision of some altogether different sightwhich was as completely real as the unchanged baptismal font.Which was real at that moment?My case is by no means the only one of its kind. But when that sortof thing happens to oneself, one cannot help taking it moreseriously than something heard or read about. In general, withanecdotes of that kind, one is quick to think of all sorts ofexplanations which dispose of the mystery. I have come to theconclusion that before we settle upon any theories in regard to theunconscious, we require many, many more experiences of it.I have traveled a great deal in my life, and I should very much haveliked to go to Rome, but I felt that I was not really up to theimpression the city would have made upon me. Pompeii alone wasmore than enough; the impressions very nearly exceeded mypowers of receptivity. I was able to visit Pompeii only after I hadacquired, through my studies of 1910 to 1912, some insight into thepsychology of classical antiquity. In 1912 I was on a ship sailingfrom Genoa to Naples. As the vessel neared the latitude of Rome, Istood at the railing. Out there lay Rome, the still smoking and fieryhearth from which ancient cultures had spread, enclosed in thetangled rootwork of the Christian and Occidental Middle Ages.There classical antiquity still lived in all its splendor andruthlessness.I always wonder about people who go to Rome as they might go, forexample, to Paris or to London. Certainly Rome as well as these

other cities can be enjoyed esthetically; but if you are affected to thedepths of your being at every step by the spirit that broods there, ifa remnant of a wall here and a column there gaze upon you with aface instantly recognized, then it becomes another matter entirely.Even in Pompeii unforeseen vistas opened, unexpected thingsbecame conscious, and questions were posed which were beyondmy powers to handle.In my old age in 1949 I wished to repair this omission, but wasstricken with a faint while I was buying tickets. After that, the plansfor a trip to Rome were once and for all laid aside.

XVisionsA THE BEGINNING of 1944 I broke my foot, and this misadventurewas followed by a heart attack. In a state of unconsciousness Iexperienced deliriums and visions which must have begun when Ihung on the edge of death and was being given oxygen andcamphor injections. The images were so tremendous that I myselfconcluded that I was close to death. My nurse afterward told me, "Itwas as if you were surrounded by a bright glow" That was aphenomenon she had sometimes observed in the dying, sheadded. I had reached the outermost limit, and do not know whether Iwas in a dream or an ecstasy. At any rate, extremely strange thingsbegan to happen to me.It seemed to me that I was high up in space. Far below I saw theglobe of the earth, bathed in a gloriously blue light. I saw the deepblue sea and the continents. Far below my feet lay Ceylon, and inthe distance ahead of me the subcontinent of India. My field ofvision did not include the whole earth, but its global shape wasplainly distinguishable and its outlines shone with a silvery gleamthrough that wonderful blue light. In many places the globe seemedcolored, or spotted dark green like oxydized silver. Far away to theleft lay a broad expanse the reddish-yellow desert of Arabia; it wasas though the silver of the earth had there assumed a reddish-goldhue. Then came the Red Sea, and far, far back as if in the upper leftof a map I could just make out a bit of the Mediterranean. My gazewas directed chiefly toward that. Everything else appearedindistinct. I could also see the snow-covered Himalayas, but in that

direction it was foggy or cloudy. I did not look to the right at all. Iknew that I was on the point of departing from the earth.Later I discovered how high in space one would have to be to haveso extensive a view approximately a thousand miles! The sight ofthe earth from this height was the most glorious thing I had everseen.After contemplating it for a while, I turned around. I had beenstanding with my back to the Indian Ocean, as it were, and my faceto the north. Then it seemed to me that I made a turn to the south.Something new entered my field of vision. A short distance away Isaw in space a tremendous dark block of stone, like a meteorite. Itwas about the size of my house, or even bigger. It was floating inspace, and I myself was floating in space.I had seen similar stones on the coast of the Gulf of Bengal. Theywere blocks of tawny granite, and some of them had been hollowedout into temples. My stone was one such gigantic dark block. Anentrance led into a small antechamber. T o the right of the entrance,a black Hindu sat silently in lotus posture upon a stone bench. Hewore a white gown, and I knew that he expected me. Two steps ledup to this antechamber, and inside, on the left, was the gate to thetemple. Innumerable tiny niches, each with a saucer-like concavityfilled with coconut oil and small burning wicks, surrounded the doorwith a wreath of bright flames. I had once actually seen this when Ivisited the Temple of the Holy Tooth at Kandy in Ceylon; the gatehad been framed by several rows of burning oil lamps of this sort.As I approached the steps leading up to the entrance into the rock,a strange thing happened: I had the feeling that everything wasbeing sloughed away; everything I aimed at or wished for orthought, the whole phantasmagoria of earthly existence, fell away orwas stripped from me an extremely painful process. Nevertheless

something remained; it was as if I now carried along with meeverything I had ever experienced or done, everything that hadhappened around me. I might also say: it was with me, and I was it. Iconsisted of all that, so to speak. I consisted of my own history, andI felt with great certainty: this is what I am. "I am this bundle of whathas been, and what has been accomplished."This experience gave me a feeling of extreme poverty, but at thesame time of great fullness. There was no longer anything I wantedor desired. I existed in an objective form; I was what I had been andlived. At first the sense of annihilation predominated, of having beenstripped or pillaged; but suddenly that became of no consequence.Everything seemed to be past; what remained was a fait accompli,without any reference back to what had been. There was no longerany regret that something had dropped away or been taken away.On the contrary: I had everything that I was, and that was everything.Something else engaged my attention: as I approached the temple Ihad the certainty that I was about to enter an illuminated room andwould meet there all those people to whom I belong in reality. ThereI would at last understand this too was a certainty what historicalnexus I or my life fitted into. I would know what had been before me,why I had come into being, and where my life was flowing. My life asI lived it had often seemed to me like a story that has no beginningand no end. I had the feeling that I was a historical fragment, anexcerpt for which the preceding and succeeding text was missing.My life seemed to have been snipped out of a long chain of events,and many questions had remained unanswered. Why had it takenthis course? Why had I brought these particular assumptions withme? What had I made of them? What will follow? I felt sure that Iwould receive an answer to all these questions as soon as I enteredthe rock temple. There I would learn why everything had been thusand not otherwise. There I would meet the people who knew theanswer to my question about what had been before and what would

come after.While I was thinking over these matters, something happened thatcaught my attention. From below, from the direction of Europe, animage floated up. It was my doctor, Dr. H. or, rather, his likenessframed by a golden chain or a golden laurel wreath. I knew at once:"Aha, this is my doctor, of course, the one who has been treatingme. But now he is coming in his primal form, as a basileus ofKos.[1] In life he was an avatar of this basileus, the temporalembodiment of the primal form, which has existed from thebeginning. Now he is appearing in that primal form".Presumably I too was in my primal form, though this was somethingI did not observe but simply took for granted. As he stood beforeme, a mute exchange of thought took place between us. Dr. H. hadbeen delegated by the earth to deliver a message to me, to tell methat there was a protest against my going away, I had no right toleave the earth and must return. The moment I heard that, the visionceased.I was profoundly disappointed, for now it all seemed to have beenfor nothing. The painful process of defoliation had been in vain, andI was not to be allowed to enter the temple, to join the people inwhose company I belonged.In reality, a good three weeks were still to pass before I could trulymake up my mind to live again. I could not eat because all foodrepelled me. The view of city and mountains from my sickbedseemed to me like a painted curtain with black holes in it, or atattered sheet of newspaper full of photographs that meant nothing.Disappointed, I thought, "Now I must return to the 'box system'again." For it seemed to me as if behind the horizon of the cosmosa three-dimensional world had been artificially built up, in whicheach person sat by himself in a little box. And now I should have to

convince myself all over again that this was important! Life and thewhole world struck me as a prison, and it bothered me beyondmeasure that I should again be finding all that quite in order. I hadbeen so glad to shed it all, and now it had come about that I alongwith everyone else would again be hung up in a box by a thread.While I floated in space, I had been weightless, and there had beennothing tugging at me. And now all that was to be a thing of thepast!1 Basileus king. Kos was famous in antiquity as the site of the temple ofAsklepios, and was the birthplace of Hippocrates. A. J.I felt violent resistance to my doctor because he had brought meback to life. At the same time, I was worried about him. "His life is indanger, for heaven's sake! He has appeared to me in his primalform! When anybody attains this form it means he is going to die,for already he belongs to the 'greater company'!" Suddenly theterrifying thought came to me that Dr. H. would have to die in mystead. I tried my best to talk to him about it, but he did notunderstand me. Then I became angry with him. "Why does healways pretend he doesn't know he is a basileus of Kos? And thathe has already assumed his primal form? He wants to make mebelieve that he doesn't know!" That irritated me. My wife reprovedme for being so unfriendly to him. She was right; but at the time Iwas angry with him for stubbornly refusing to speak of all that hadpassed between us in my vision. "Damn it all, he ought to watch hisstep. He has no right to be so reckless! I want to tell him to takecare of himself." I was firmly convinced that his life was in jeopardy.In actual fact I was his last patient. On April 4, 1944 I still rememberthe exact date I was allowed to sit up on the edge of my bed for thefirst time since the beginning of my illness, and on this same dayDr. H. took to his bed and did not leave it again. I heard that he washaving intermittent attacks of fever. Soon afterward he died of

septicemia. He was a good doctor; there was something of thegenius about him. Otherwise he would not have appeared to me asa prince of Kos.During those weeks I lived in a strange rhythm. By day I was usuallydepressed. I felt weak and wretched, and scarcely dared to stir.Gloomily, I thought, "Now I must go back to this drab world." T owardevening I would fall asleep, and my sleep would last until aboutmidnight. Then I would come to myself and lie awake for about anhour, but in an utterly transformed state. It was as if I were in anecstasy. I felt as though I were floating in space, as though I weresafe in the womb of the universe in a tremendous void, but filledwith the highest possible feeling of happiness. "This is eternalbliss," I thought. "This cannot be described; it is far too wonderful!"Everything around me seemed enchanted. At this hour of the nightthe nurse brought me some food she had warmed for only then wasI able to take any, and I ate with appetite. For a time it seemed tome that she was an old Jewish woman, much older than sheactually was, and that she was preparing ritual kosher dishes forme. When I looked at her, she seemed to have a blue halo aroundher head. I myself was, so it seemed, in the Pardes Rimmonim, thegarden of pomegranates, [2] and the wedding of Tifereth withMalchuth was taking place. Or else I was Rabbi Simon ben Jochai,whose wedding in the afterlife was being celebrated. It was themystic marriage as it appears in the Cabbalistic tradition. I cannottell you how wonderful it was. I could only think continually, "Now thisis the garden of pomegranates! Now this is the marriage ofMalchuth with Tifereth!" I do not know exactly what part I played in it.At bottom it was I myself: I was the marriage. And my beatitude wasthat of a blissful wedding.Gradually the garden of pomegranates faded away and changed.There followed the Marriage of the Lamb, in a Jerusalem festively

bedecked. I cannot describe what it was like in detail. These wereineffable states of joy . Angels were present, and light. I myself wasthe "Marriage of the Lamb."That, too, vanished, and there came a new image, the last vision. Iwalked up a wide valley to the end, where a gentle chain of hillsbegan. The valley ended in a classical amphi-theater. It wasmagnificently situated in the green landscape. And there, in thistheater, the hierosgamos was being celebrated. Men and womendancers came onstage, and upon a flower-decked couch All-fatherZeus and Hera consummated the mystic marriage, as it isdescribed in the Iliad.All these experiences were glorious. Night after night I floated in astate of purest bliss, "thronged round with images of all creation."[3] Gradually, the motifs mingled and paled. Usually the visionslasted for about an hour; then I would fall asleep again. By the timemorning drew near, I would feel: Now gray morning is coming again;now comes the gray world with its boxes! What idiocy, whathideous nonsense! Those inner states were so fantasticallybeautiful that by comparison this world appeared downrightridiculous. As I approached closer to life again, they grew fainter,and scarcely three weeks after the first vision they ceasedaltogether.2 Pardes Rimmonim is the title of an old Cabbalistic tract by MosesCordovero (sixteenth century). In Cabbalistic doctrine Malchuth and Tiferethare two of the ten spheres of divine manifestation in which God emergesfrom his hidden state. They represent the female and male principles withinthe Godhead.3 Faust, Part Two.It is impossible to convey the beauty and intensity of emotion duringthose visions. They were the most tremendous things I have ever

experienced. And what a contrast the day was: I was tormented andon edge; everything irritated me; everything was too material, toocrude and clumsy, terribly limited both spatially and spiritually. It wasall an imprisonment, for reasons impossible to divine, and yet it hada kind of hypnotic power, a cogency, as if it were reality itself, for allthat I had clearly perceived its emptiness. Although my belief in theworld returned to me, I have never since entirely freed myself of theimpression that this life is a segment of existence which is enactedin a three-dimensional boxlike universe especially set up for it.There is something else I quite distinctly remember. At thebeginning, when I was having the vision of the garden ofpomegranates, I asked the nurse to forgive me if she were harmed.There was such sanctity in the room, I said, that it might be harmfulto her. Of course she did not understand me. For me the presenceof sanctity had a magical atmosphere; I feared it might beunendurable to others. I understood then why one speaks of theodor of sanctity, of the "sweet smell" of the Holy Ghost. This was it.There was a pneuma of inexpressible sanctity in the room, whosemanifestation was the mysterium coniunctionis.I would never have imagined that any such experience waspossible. It was not a product of imagination. The visions andexperiences were utterly real; there was nothing subjective aboutthem; they all had a quality of absolute objectivity.We shy away from the word "eternal," but I can describe theexperience only as the ecstasy of a non-temporal state in whichpresent, past, and future are one. Everything that happens in timehad been brought together into a concrete whole. Nothing wasdistributed over time, nothing could be measured by temporalconcepts. The experience might best be defined as a state offeeling, but one which cannot be produced by imagination. How canI imagine that I exist simultaneously the day before yesterday, today,

and the day after tomorrow? There would be things which would notyet have begun, other things which would be indubitably present,and others again which would already be finished and yet all thiswould be one. The only thing that feeling could grasp would be asum, an iridescent whole, containing all at once expectation of abeginning, surprise at what is now happening, and satisfaction ordisappointment with the result of what has happened. One isinterwoven into an indescribable whole and yet observes it withcomplete objectivity.I experienced this objectivity once again later on. That was after thedeath of my wife. I saw her in a dream which was like a vision. Shestood at some distance from me, looking at me squarely. She wasin her prime, perhaps about thirty , and wearing the dress which hadbeen made for her many years before by my cousin the medium. Itwas perhaps the most beautiful thing she had ever worn. Herexpression was neither joyful nor sad, but, rather, objectively wiseand understanding, without the slightest emotional reaction, asthough she were beyond the mist of affects. I knew that it was notshe, but a portrait she had made or commissioned for me. Itcontained the beginning of our relationship, the events of fifty-threeyears of marriage, and the end of her life also. Face to face withsuch wholeness one remains speechless, for it can scarcely becomprehended.The objectivity which I experienced in this dream and in the visionsis part of a completed individuation. It signifies detachment fromvaluations and from what we call emotional ties. In general,emotional ties are very important to human beings. But they stillcontain projections, and it is essential to withdraw these projectionsin order to attain to oneself and to objectivity . Emotionalrelationships are relationships of desire, tainted by coercion andconstraint; something is expected from the other person, and thatmakes him and ourselves unfree. Objective cognition lies hidden

behind the attraction of the emotional relationship; it seems to bethe central secret. Only through objective cognition is the realconiunctio possible.After the illness a fruitful period of work began for me. A good manyof my principal works were written only then. The insight I had had,or the vision of the end of all things, gave me the courage toundertake new formulations. I no longer attempted to put across myown opinion, but surrendered myself to the current of my thoughts.Thus one problem after the other revealed itself to me and tookshape.Something else, too, came to me from my illness. I might formulateit as an affirmation of things as they are: an unconditional "yes" tothat which is, without subjective protests acceptance of theconditions of existence as I see them and understand them,acceptance of my own nature, as I happen to be. At the beginningof the illness I had the feeling that there was something wrong withmy attitude, and that I was to some extent responsible for themishap. But when one follows the path of individuation, when onelives one's own life, one must take mistakes into the bargain; lifewould not be complete without them. There is no guarantee not for asingle moment that we will not fall into error or stumble into deadlyperil. We may think there is a sure road. But that would be the roadof death. Then nothing happens any longer at any rate, not the rightthings. Anyone who takes the sure road is as good as dead.It was only after the illness that I understood how important it is toaffirm one's own destiny. In this way we forge an ego that does notbreak down when incomprehensible things happen; an ego thatendures, that endures the truth, and that is capable of coping withthe world and with fate. Then, to experience defeat is also toexperience victory. Nothing is disturbed neither inwardly noroutwardly, for one's own continuity has withstood the current of life

and of time. But that can come to pass only when one does notmeddle inquisitively with the workings of fate.I have also realized that one must accept the thoughts that go onwithin oneself of their own accord as part of one's reality. Thecategories of true and false are, of course, always present; butbecause they are not binding they take second place. Thepresence of thoughts is more important than our subjectivejudgment of them. But neither must these judgments besuppressed, for they also are existent thoughts which are part of ourwholeness.

XIOn Life after DeathWHAT I HAVE to tell about the hereafter, and about life after death,consists entirely of memories, of images in which I have lived and ofthoughts which have buffeted me. These memories in a way alsounderlie my works; for the latter are fundamentally nothing butattempts, ever renewed, to give an answer to the question of theinterplay between the "here" and the "hereafter." Y et I have neverwritten expressly about a life after death; for then I would have hadto document my ideas, and I have no way of doing that. Be that as itmay, I would like to state my ideas now.Even now I can do no more than tell stories "mythologize." Perhapsone has to be close to death to acquire the necessary freedom totalk about it. It is not that I wish we had a life after death. In fact, Iwould prefer not to foster such ideas. Still, I must state, to givereality its due, that, without my wishing and without my doinganything about it, thoughts of this nature move about within me. Ican't say whether these thoughts are true or false, but I do know theyare there, and can be given utterance, if I do not repress them out ofsome prejudice. Prejudice cripples and injures the full phenomenonof psychic life. And I know too little about psychic life to feel that Ican set it right out of superior knowledge. Critical rationalism hasapparently eliminated, along with so many other mythicconceptions, the idea of life after death. This could only havehappened because nowadays most people identify themselvesalmost exclusively with their consciousness, and imagine that theyare only what they know about themselves. Y et anyone with even a

smattering of psychology can see how limited this knowledge is.Rationalism and doctrinairism are the disease of our time; theypretend to have all the answers. But a great deal will yet bediscovered which our present limited view would have ruled out asimpossible. Our concepts of space and time have only approximatevalidity, and there is therefore a wide field for minor and majordeviations. In view of all this, I lend an attentive ear to the strangemyths of the psyche, and take a careful look at the varied eventsthat come my way, regardless of whether or not they fit in with mytheoretical postulates.Unfortunately, the mythic side of man is given short shrift nowadays.He can no longer create fables. As a result, a great deal escapeshim; for it is important and salutary to speak also ofincomprehensible things. Such talk is like the telling of a good ghoststory, as we sit by the fireside and smoke a pipe.What the myths or stories about a life after death really mean, orwhat kind of reality lies behind them, we certainly do not know. Wecannot tell whether they possess any validity beyond theirindubitable value as anthropomorphic projections. Rather, we musthold clearly in mind that there is no possible way for us to attaincertainty concerning things which pass our understanding.We cannot visualize another world ruled by quite other laws, thereason being that we live in a specific world which has helped toshape our minds and establish our basic psychic conditions. Weare strictly limited by our innate structure and therefore bound by ourwhole being and thinking to this world of ours. Mythic man, to besure, demands a "going beyond all that" but scientific man cannotpermit this. T o the intellect, all my mythologizing is futile speculation.To  t he  e m o t i o ns ,  ho we ve r,  i t  i s  a  he a l i ng  a nd  va l i d  a c t i vi t y;  i t  g i ve sexistence a glamour which we would not like to do without. Nor isthere any good reason why we should.

Parapsychology holds it to be a scientifically valid proof of anafterlife that the dead manifest themselves either as ghosts, orthrough a medium and communicate things which they alone couldpossibly know. But even though there do exist such well-documented cases, the question remains whether the ghost or thevoice is identical with the dead person or is a psychic projection,and whether the things said really derive from the deceased or fromknowledge which may be present in the unconscious.[1]Leaving aside the rational arguments against any certainty in thesematters, we must not forget that for most people it means a greatdeal to assume that their lives will have an indefinite continuitybeyond their present existence. They live more sensibly, feel better,and are more at peace. One has centuries, one has aninconceivable period of time at one's disposal. What then is thepoint of this senseless mad rush?Naturally, such reasoning does not apply to everyone. There arepeople who feel no craving for immortality, and who shudder at thethought of sitting on a cloud and playing the harp for ten thousandyears! There are also quite a few who have been so buffeted by life,or who feel such disgust for their own existence, that they far preferabsolute cessation to continuance. But in the majority of cases thequestion of immortality is so urgent, so immediate, and also soineradicable that we must make an effort to form some sort of viewabout it. But how?My hypothesis is that we can do so with the aid of hints sent to usfrom the unconscious in dreams, for example. Usually we dismissthese hints because we are convinced that the question is notsusceptible to answer. In response to this understandableskepticism, I suggest the following considerations. If there issomething we cannot know, we must necessarily abandon it as an

intellectual problem. For example, I do not know for what reason theuniverse has come into being, and shall never know,1 Concerning "absolute knowledge" in the unconscious, cf. "Synchronicity:An Acausal Connecting Principle" in The Structure and Dynamics of thePsyche (CW8),pp.48i ff.Therefore I must drop this question as a scientific or intellectualproblem. But if an idea about it is offered to me in dreams or inmythic traditions I ought to take note of it. I even ought to build up aconception on the basis of such hints, even though it will foreverremain a hypothesis which I know cannot be proved.A man should be able to say he has done his best to form aconception of life after death, or to create some image of it--even ifhe must confess his failure. Not to have done so is a vital loss. Forthe question that is posed to him is the age-old heritage ofhumanity: an archetype, rich in secret life, which seeks to add itselfto our own individual life in order to make it whole. Reason sets theboundaries far too narrowly for us, and would have us accept onlythe known and that too with limitations and live in a knownframework, just as if we were sure how far life actually extends. As amatter of fact, day after day we live far beyond the bounds of ourconsciousness; without our knowledge, the life of the unconsciousis also going on within us. The more the critical reason dominates,the more impoverished life becomes; but the more of theunconscious, and the more of myth we are capable of makingconscious, the more of life we integrate. Overvalued reason has thisin common with political absolutism: under its dominion theindividual is pauperized.The unconscious helps by communicating things to us, or makingfigurative allusions. It has other ways, too, of informing us of thingswhich by all logic we could not possibly know. Consider

synchronistic phenomena, premonitions, and dreams that cometrue. I recall one time during the Second World War when I wasreturning home from Bollingen. I had a book with me, but could notread, for the moment the train started to move I was overpoweredby the image of someone drowning. This was a memory of anaccident that had happened while I was on military service. Duringthe entire journey I could not rid myself of it. It struck me as uncanny,and I thought, "What has happened? Can there have been anaccident?"I got out at Erlenbach and walked home, still troubled by thismemory. My second daughters children were in the garden. Thefamily was living with us, having returned to Switzerland from Parisbecause of the war. The children stood looking rather upset, andwhen I asked, "Why, what is the matter?" they told me that Adrian,then the youngest of the boys, had fallen into the water in theboathouse. It is quite deep there, and since he could not really swimhe had almost drowned. His older brother had fished him out. Thishad taken place at exactly the time I had been assailed by thatmemory in the train. The unconscious had given me a hint. Whyshould it not be able to inform me of other things also?I had a somewhat similar experience before a death in my wife'sfamily. I dreamed that my wife's bed was a deep pit with stonewalls. It was a grave, and somehow had a suggestion of classicalantiquity about it. Then I heard a deep sigh, as if someone weregiving up the ghost. A figure that resembled my wife sat up in the pitand floated upward. It wore a white gown into which curious blacksymbols were woven. I awoke, roused my wife, and checked thetime. It was three o'clock in the morning. The dream was so curiousthat I thought at once that it might signify a death. At seven o'clockcame the news that a cousin of my wife had died at three o'clock inthe morning.

Frequently foreknowledge is there, but not recognition. Thus I oncehad a dream in which I was attending a garden party. I saw mysister there, and that greatly surprised me, for she had died someyears before. A deceased friend of mine was also present. The restwere people who were still alive. Presently I saw that my sister wasaccompanied by a lady I knew well. Even in the dream I had drawnthe conclusion that the lady was going to die. "She is alreadymarked," I thought. In the dream I knew exactly who she was. I knewalso that she lived in Basel. But as soon as I woke up I could nolonger, with the best will in the world, recall who she was, althoughthe whole dream was still vivid in my mind. I pictured all myacquaintances in Basel to see whether the memory images wouldring a bell. Nothing!A few weeks later I received news that a friend of mine had had afatal accident. I knew at once that she was the person I had seen inthe dream but had been unable to identify. My recollection of herwas perfectly clear and richly detailed, since she had been mypatient for a considerable time up to a year before her death. In myattempt to recall the person in my dream, however, hers was theone picture which did not appear in my portrait gallery of Baselacquaintances, although by rights it should have been one of thefirst.When one has such experiences and I will tell of others like themone acquires a certain respect for the potentialities and arts of theunconscious. Only, one must remain critical and be aware that suchcommunications may have a subjective meaning as well. They maybe in accord with reality, and then again they may not. I have,however, learned that the views I have been able to form on thebasis of such hints from the unconscious have been mostrewarding. Naturally, I am not going to write a book of revelationsabout them, but I will acknowledge that I have a "myth" whichencourages me to look deeper into this whole realm. Myths are the

earliest form of science. When I speak of things after death, I amspeaking out of inner prompting, and can go no farther than to tellyou dreams and myths that relate to this subject.Naturally, one can contend from the start that myths and dreamsconcerning continuity of life after death are merely compensatingfantasies which are inherent in our natures all life desires eternity.The only argument I can adduce in answer to this is the myth itself.However, there are indications that at least a part of the psyche isnot subject to the laws of space and time. Scientific proof of thathas been provided by the well-known J. B. Rhine experiments. [2]Along with numerous cases of spontaneous foreknowledge, non-spatial perceptions, and so on of which I have given a number ofexamples from my own life--these experiments prove that thepsyche at times functions outside of the spatio-temporal law ofcausality. This indicates that our conceptions of space and time,and therefore of causality also, are incomplete. A complete pictureof the world would require the addition of still another dimension;only then could the totality of phenomena be given a unifiedexplanation. Hence it is that3 Extra-sensory Perception (Boston, 1934); The Reach of the Mind (NewYork, 1947).the rationalists insist to this day that parapsychological experiencesdo not really exist; for their world-view stands or falls by thisquestion. If such phenomena occur at all, the rationalistic picture ofthe universe is invalid, because incomplete. Then the possibility ofan other-valued reality behind the phenomenal world becomes aninescapable problem, and we must face the fact that our world, withits time, space, and causality , relates to another order of thingslying behind or beneath it, in which neither "here and there" nor"earlier and later" are of importance. I have been convinced that at

least a part of our psychic existence is characterized by a relativityof space and time. This relativity seems to increase, in proportionto the distance from consciousness, to an absolute condition oftimelessness and spacelessness.Not only my own dreams, but also occasionally the dreams ofothers, helped to shape, revise, or confirm my views on a life afterdeath. I attach particular importance to a dream which a pupil ofmine, a woman of sixty, dreamed about two months before herdeath. She had entered the hereafter. There was a class going on,and various deceased women friends of hers sat on the frontbench. An atmosphere of general expectation prevailed. Shelooked around for a teacher or lecturer, but could find none. Then itbecame plain that she herself was the lecturer, for immediately afterdeath people had to give accounts of the total experience of theirlives. The dead were extremely interested in the life experiencesthat the newly deceased brought with them, just as if the acts andexperiences taking place in earthly life, in space and time, were thedecisive ones.In any case, the dream describes a most unusual audience whoselike could scarcely be found on earth: people burningly interested inthe final psychological results of a human life that was in no wayremarkable, any more than were the conclusions that could bedrawn from it to our way of thinking. If, however, the "audience"existed in a state of relative non-time, where "termination" "event,"and "development" had become questionable concepts, they mightvery well be most interested precisely in what was lacking in theirown condition.At the time of this dream the lady was afraid of death and did herbest to fend off any thoughts about it. Y et death is an importantinterest, especially to an aging person. A categorical question isbeing put to him, and he is under an obligation to answer it. T o this

end he ought to have a myth about death, for reason shows himnothing but the dark pit into which he is descending. Myth, however,can conjure up other images for him, helpful and enriching picturesof life in the land of the dead. If he believes in them, or greets themwith some measure of credence, he is being just as right or just aswrong as someone who does not believe in them. But while theman who despairs marches toward nothingness, the one who hasplaced his faith in the archetype follows the tracks of life and livesright into his death. Both, to be sure, remain in uncertainty, but theone lives against his instincts, the other with them.The figures from the unconscious are uninformed too, and needman, or contact with consciousness, in order to attain to knowledge.When I began working with the unconscious, I found myself muchinvolved with the figures of Salome and Elijah. Then they receded,but after about two years they reappeared. T o my enormousastonishment, they were completely unchanged; they spoke andacted as if nothing had happened in the meanwhile. In actuality themost incredible things had taken place in my life. I had, as it were,to begin from the beginning again, to tell them all about what hadbeen going on, and explain things to them. At the time I had beengreatly surprised by this situation. Only later did I understand whathad happened: in the interval the two had sunk back into theunconscious and into themselves I might equally well put it, intotimelessness. They remained out of contact with the ego and theego's changing circumstances, and therefore were ignorant of whathad happened in the world of consciousness.Quite early I had learned that it was necessary for me to instruct thefigures of the unconscious, or that other group which is oftenindistinguishable from them, the "spirits of the departed." The firsttime I experienced this was on a bicycle trip through upper Italywhich I took with a friend in 1911. On the way home we cycled fromPavia to Arona, on the lower part of Lake Maggiore, and spent the

night there. We had intended to pedal on along the lake and thenthrough the T essin as far as Faido, where we were going to takethe train to Zurich. But in Arona I had a dream which upset ourplans.In the dream I was in an assemblage of distinguished spirits ofearlier centuries; the feeling was similar to the one I had latertoward the "illustrious ancestors" in the black rock temple of my1944 vision. The conversation was conducted in Latin. A gentlemanwith a long, curly wig addressed me and asked a difficult question,the gist of which I could no longer recall after I woke up. I understoodhim, but did not have a sufficient command of the language toanswer him in Latin. I felt so profoundly humiliated by this that theemotion awakened me.At the very moment of awakening I thought of the book I was thenworking on, Wandlungen und Symbole der Libido, and had suchintense inferiority feelings about the unanswered question that Iimmediately took the train home in order to get back to work. Itwould have been impossible for me to continue the bicycle trip andlose another three days. I had to work, to find the answer.Not until years later did I understand the dream and my reaction.The bewigged gentleman was a kind of ancestral spirit, or spirit ofthe dead, who had addressed questions to me in vain! It was stilltoo soon, I had not yet come so far, but I had an obscure feeling thatby working on my book I would be answering the question that hadbeen asked. It had been asked by, as it were, my spiritualforefathers, in the hope and expectation that they would learn whatthey had not been able to find out during their time on earth, sincethe answer had first to be created in the centuries that followed. Ifquestion and answer had already been in existence in eternity, hadalways been there, no effort on my part would have been necessary,and it could all have been discovered in any other century. There

does seem to be unlimited knowledge present in nature, it is true,but it can be comprehended by consciousness only when the timeis ripe for it. The process, presumably , is like what happens in theindividual psyche: a man may go about for many years with aninkling of something, but grasps it clearly only at a particularmoment.Later, when I wrote the Septem Sermones ad Mortuos, once againit was the dead who addressed crucial questions to me. They cameso they said "back from Jerusalem, where they found not what theysought." This had surprised me greatly at the time, for according tothe traditional views the dead are the possessors of greatknowledge. People have the idea that the dead know far more thanwe, for Christian doctrine teaches that in the hereafter we shall "seeface to face." Apparently, however, the souls of the dead "know"only what they knew at the moment of death, and nothing beyondthat. Hence their endeavor to penetrate into life in order to share inthe knowledge of men. I frequently have a feeling that they arestanding directly behind us, waiting to hear what answer we will giveto them, and what answer to destiny. It seems to me as if they weredependent on the living for receiving answers to their questions,that is, on those who have survived them and exist in a world ofchange: as if omniscience or, as I might put it, omni-consciousness,were not at their disposal, but could flow only into the psyche of theliving, into a soul bound to a body. The mind of the living appears,therefore, to hold an advantage over that of the dead in at least onepoint: in the capacity for attaining clear and decisive cognitions. AsI see it, the three-dimensional world in time and space is like asystem of co-ordinates; what is here separated into ordinates andabscissae may appear ''there," in space-timelessness, as aprimordial image with many aspects, perhaps as a diffuse cloud ofcognition surrounding an archetype. Y et a system of co-ordinates isnecessary if any distinction of discrete contents is to be possible.

Any such operation seems to us unthinkable in a state of diffuseomniscience, or, as the case may be, of subjectlessconsciousness, with no spatio-temporal demarcations. Cognition,like generation, presupposes an opposition, a here and there, anabove and below, a before and after.If there were to be a conscious existence after death, it would, so itseems to me, have to continue on the level of consciousnessattained by humanity, which in any age has an upper thoughvariable limit. There are many human beings who throughout theirlives and at the moment of death lag behind their own potentialitiesand even more important behind the knowledge which has beenbrought to consciousness by other human beings during their ownlifetimes. Hence their demand to attain in death that share ofawareness which they failed to win in life.I have come to this conclusion through observation of dreams aboutthe dead. I dreamed once that I was paying a visit to a friend whohad died about two weeks before. In life, this friend had neverespoused anything but a conventional view of the world, and hadremained stuck in this unreflecting attitude. In the dream his homewas on a hill similar to the Tullinger hill near Basel. The walls of anold castle surrounded a square consisting of a small church and afew smaller buildings. It reminded me of the square in front of thecastle of Rapperswil. It was autumn. The leaves of the ancient treeshad turned gold, and the whole scene was transfigured by gentlesunlight. My friend sat at a table with his daughter, who had studiedpsychology in Zurich. I knew that she was telling him aboutpsychology. He was so fascinated by what she was saying that hegreeted me only with a casual wave of the hand, as though tointimate: "Don't disturb me." The greeting was at the same time adismissal. The dream told me that now, in a manner which ofcourse remains incomprehensible to me, he was required to graspthe reality of his psychic existence, which he had never been

capable of doing during his life.I had another experience of the evolution of the soul after deathwhen about a year after my wife's death I suddenly awoke one nightand knew that I had been with her in the south of France, inProvence, and had spent an entire day with her. She was engagedon studies of the Grail there. That seemed significant to me, for shehad died before completing her work on this subject. Interpretationon the subjective level that my anima had not yet finished with thework she had to do yielded nothing of interest; I know quite well thatI am not yet finished with that. But the thought that my wife wascontinuing after death to work on her further spiritual developmenthowever that may be conceived struck me as meaningful and held ameasure of reassurance for me.Ideas of this sort are, of course, inaccurate, and give a wrongpicture, like a body projected on a plane or, conversely, like theconstruction of a four-dimensional model out of a three-dimensionalbody. They use the terms of a three-dimensional world in order torepresent themselves to us. Mathematics goes to great pains tocreate expressions for relationships which pass empiricalcomprehension. In much the same way, it is all-important for adisciplined imagination to build up images of intangibles by logicalprinciples and on the basis of empirical data, that is, on theevidence of dreams. The method employed is what I have called"the method of the necessary statement." It represents the principleof amplification in the interpretation of dreams, but can most easilybe demonstrated by the statements implicit in simple wholenumbers.One, as the first numeral, is unity. But it is also "the unity," the One,All-Oneness, individuality and non-duality not a numeral but aphilosophical concept, an archetype and attribute of God, themonad. It is quite proper that the human intellect should make these

statements; but at the same time the intellect is determined andlimited by its conception of oneness and its implications. In otherwords, these statements are not arbitrary. They are governed by thenature of oneness and therefore are necessary statements.Theoretically, the same logical operation could be performed foreach of the following conceptions of number, but in practice theprocess soon comes to an end because of the rapid increase incomplications, which become too numerous to handle.Every further unit introduces new properties and new modifications.Thus, it is a property of the number four that equations of the fourthdegree can be solved, whereas equations of the fifth degreecannot. The necessary statement of the number four, therefore, isthat, among other things, it is an apex and simultaneously the end ofa preceding ascent. Since with each additional unit one or morenew mathematical properties appear, the statements attain such acomplexity that they can no longer be formulated.The infinite series of natural numbers corresponds to the infinitenumber of individual creatures. That series likewise consists ofindividuals, and the properties even of its first ten membersrepresent if they represent anything at all an abstract cosmogonyderived from the monad. The properties of numbers are, however,simultaneously properties of matter, for which reason certainequations can anticipate its behavior.Therefore I submit that other than mathematical statements (i.e.,statements implicit in nature) are likewise capable of pointing toirrepresentable realities beyond themselves such, for example, asthose products of the imagination which enjoy universal acceptanceor are distinguished by the frequency of their occurrence, like thewhole class of archetypal motifs. Just as in the case of somefactors in mathematical equations we cannot say to what physicalrealities they correspond, so in the case of some mythological

products we do not know at first to what psychic realities they refer.Equations governing the turbulence of heated gases existed longbefore the problems of such gases had been preciselyinvestigated. Similarly , we have long been in possession ofmythologems which express the dynamics of certain subliminalprocesses, though these processes were only given names in veryrecent times.The maximum awareness which has been attained anywhereforms, so it seems to me, the upper limit of knowledge to which thedead can attain. That is probably why earthly life is of such greatsignificance, and why it is that what a human being "brings over" atthe time of his death is so important. Only here, in life on earth,where the opposites clash together, can the general level ofconsciousness be raised. That seems to be man's metaphysicaltask which he cannot accomplish without "mythologizing." Myth isthe natural and indispensable intermediate stage betweenunconscious and conscious cognition. True, the unconsci ous knowsmore than consciousness does; but it is knowledge of a specialsort, knowledge in eternity, usually without reference to the here andnow, not couched in language of the intellect. Only when we let itsstatements amplify themselves, as has been shown above by theexample of numerals, does it come within the range of ourunderstanding; only then does a new aspect become perceptible tous. This process is convincingly repeated in every successfuldream analysis. That is why it is so important not to have anypreconceived, doctrinaire opinions about the statements made bydreams. As soon as a certain "monotony of interpretation" strikesus, we know that our approach has become doctrinaire and hencesterile.Although there is no way to marshal valid proof of continuance ofthe soul after death, there are nevertheless experiences whichmake us thoughtful. I take them as hints, and do not presume to

ascribe to them the significance of insights.One night I lay awake thinking of the sudden death of a friendwhose funeral had taken place the day before. I was deeplyconcerned. Suddenly I felt that he was in the room. It seemed to methat he stood at the foot of my bed and was asking me to go withhim. I did not have the feeling of an apparition; rather, it was aninner visual image of him, which I explained to myself as a fantasy .But in all honesty I had to ask myself, "Do I have any proof that thisis a fantasy? Suppose it is not a fantasy, suppose my friend is reallyhere and I decided he was only a fantasy would that not beabominable of me?" Y et I had equally little proof that he stoodbefore me as an apparition. Then I said to myself, "Proof is neitherhere nor there! Instead of explaining him away as a fantasy, I mightjust as well give him the benefit of the doubt and for experiment'ssake credit him with reality." The moment I had that thought, he wentto the door and beckoned me to follow him. So I was going to haveto play along with him! That was something I hadn't bargained for. Ihad to repeat my argument to myself once more. Only then did Ifollow him in my imagination.He led me out of the house, into the garden, out to the road, andfinally to his house, (In reality it was several hundred yards awayfrom mine.) I went in, and he conducted me into his study. Heclimbed on a stool and showed me the second of five books withred bindings which stood on the second shelf from the top. Then thevision broke off. I was not acquainted with his library and did notknow what books he owned. Certainly I could never have made outfrom below the titles of the books he had pointed out to me on thesecond shelf from the top.This experience seemed to me so curious that next morning I wentto his widow and asked whether I could look up something in myfriend's library. Sure enough, there was a stool standing under the

bookcase I had seen in my vision, and even before I came closer Icould see the five books with red bindings. I stepped up on the stoolso as to be able to read the titles. They were translations of thenovels of Emile Zola. The title of the second volume read: "TheLegacy of the Dead." The contents seemed to me of no interest.Only the title was extremely significant in connection with thisexperience.Equally important to me were the dream-experiences I had beforemy mother's death. News of her death came to me while I wasstaying in the T essin. I was deeply shaken, for it had come withunexpected suddenness. The night before her death I had afrightening dream. I was in a dense, gloomy forest; fantastic,gigantic boulders lay about among huge jungle-like trees. It was aheroic, primeval landscape. Suddenly I heard a piercing whistle thatseemed to resound through the whole universe. My knees shook.Then there were crashings in the underbrush, and a giganticwolfhound with a fearful, gaping maw burst forth. At the sight of it,the blood froze in my veins. It tore past me, and I suddenly knew: theWild Huntsman had commanded it to carry away a human soul. Iawoke in deadly terror, and the next morning I received the news ofmy mother's passing.Seldom has a dream so shaken me, for upon superficialconsideration it seemed to say that the devil had fetched her. But tobe accurate the dream said that it was the Wild Huntsman, the"Grunhutl" or Wearer of the Green Hat, who hunted with his wolvesthat night it was the season of Fohn storms in January. It wasWotan, the god of my Alemannic forefathers, who had gathered mymother to her ancestors negatively to the "wild horde," but positivelyto the "salig lut" the blessed folk. It was the Christian missionarieswho made Wotan into a devil. In himself he is an important god--aMercury or Hermes, as the Romans correctly realized, a naturespirit who returned to life again in the Merlin of the Grail legend and

became, as the spiritus Mercurialis, the sought-after arcanum of thealchemists. Thus the dream says that the soul of my mother wastaken into that greater territory of the self which lies beyond thesegment of Christian morality, taken into that wholeness of natureand spirit in which conflicts and contradictions are resolved.I went home immediately, and while I rode in the night train I had afeeling of great grief, but in my heart of hearts I could not bemournful, and this for a strange reason: during the entire journey Icontinually heard dance music, laughter, and jollity, as though awedding were being celebrated. This contrasted violently with thedevastating impression the dream had made on me. Here was gaydance music, cheerful laughter, and it was impossible to yieldentirely to my sorrow. Again and again it was on the point ofoverwhelming me, but the next moment I would find myself oncemore engulfed by the merry melodies. One side of me had a feelingof warmth and joy, and the other of terror and grief; I was thrownback and forth between these contrasting emotions.This paradox can be explained if we suppose that at one momentdeath was being represented from the point of view of the ego, andat the next from that of the psyche. In the first case it appeared as acatastrophe; that is how it so often strikes us, as if wicked andpitiless powers had put an end to a human life.And so it is death is indeed a fearful piece of brutality; there is nosense pretending otherwise. It is brutal not only as a physical event,but far more so psychically: a human being is torn away from us,and what remains is the icy stillness of death. There no longerexists any hope of a relationship, for all the bridges have beensmashed at one blow. Those who deserve a long life are cut off inthe prime of their years, and good-for-nothings live to a ripe oldage. This is a cruel reality which we have no right to sidestep. Theactual experience of the cruelty and wantonness of death can so

embitter us that we conclude there is no merciful God, no justice,and no kindness.From another point of view, however, death appears as a joyfulevent. In the light of eternity, it is a wedding, a mysteriumconiunctionis. The soul attains, as it were, its missing half, itachieves wholeness. On Greek sarcophagi the joyous element wasrepresented by dancing girls, on Etruscan tombs by banquets.When the pious Cabbalist Rabbi Simon ben Jochai came to die,his friends said that he was celebrating his wedding. To this day itis the custom in many regions to hold a picnic on the graves on AllSouls' Day . Such customs express the feeling that death is really afestive occasion.Several months before my mother's death, in September 1922, Ihad a dream which presaged it. It concerned my father, and made adeep impression upon me. I had not dreamed of my father since hisdeath in 1896. Now he once more appeared in a dream, as if hehad returned from a distant journey. He looked rejuvenated, andhad shed his appearance of paternal authoritarianism. I went intomy library with him, and was greatly pleased at the prospect offinding out what he had been up to. I was also looking forward withparticular joy to introducing my wife and children to him, to showinghim my house, and to telling him all that had happened to me andwhat I had become in the meanwhile. I wanted also to tell him aboutmy book on psychological types, which had recently beenpublished. But I quickly saw that all this would be inopportune, formy father looked preoccupied. Apparently he wanted somethingfrom me. I felt that plainly, and so I refrained from talking about myown concerns.He then said to me that since I was after all a psychologist, hewould like to consult me about marital psychology. I made ready togive him a lengthy lecture on the complexities of marriage, but at

this point I awoke. I could not properly understand the dream, for itnever occurred to me that it might refer to my mother's death. Irealized that only when she died suddenly in January 1923.My parents' marriage was not a happy one, but full of trials anddifficulties and tests of patience. Both made the mistakes typical ofmany couples. My dream was a forecast of my mother's death, forhere was my father who, after an absence of twenty-six years,wished to ask a psychologist about the newest insights andinformation on marital problems, since he would soon have toresume this relationship again. Evidently he had acquired no betterunderstanding in his timeless state and therefore had to appeal tosomeone among the living who, enjoying the benefits of changedtimes, might have a fresh approach to the whole thing.Such was the dream's message. Undoubtedly , I could have foundout a good deal more by looking into its subjective meaning but whydid I dream it just before the death of my mother, which I did notforesee? It plainly referred to my father, with whom I felt a sympathythat deepened as I grew older.Since the unconscious, as the result of its spatio-temporal relativity ,possesses better sources of information than the conscious mindwhich has only sense perceptions available to it we are dependentfor our myth of life after death upon the meager hints of dreams andsimilar spontaneous revelations from the unconscious. As I havealready said, we cannot attribute to these allusions the value ofknowledge, let alone proof. They can, however, serve as suitablebases for mythic amplifications; they give the probing intellect theraw material which is indispensable for its vitality. Cut off theintermediary world of mythic imagination, and the mind falls prey todoctrinaire rigidities. On the other hand, too much traffic with thesegerms of myth is dangerous for weak and suggestible minds, forthey are led to mistake vague intimations for substantial knowledge,

and to hypostatize mere phantasms.One widespread myth of the hereafter is formed by the ideas andimages centering on reincarnation. In one country whose intellectualculture is highly complex and much older than ours I am, of course,referring to India the idea of reincarnation is as much taken forgranted as, among us, the idea that God created the world, or thatthere is a spiritus rector. Cultivated Hindus know that we do notshare their ideas about this, but that does not trouble them. Inkeeping with the spirit of the East, the succession of birth and deathis viewed as an endless continuity , as an eternal wheel rolling onforever without a goal, Man lives and attains knowledge and diesand begins again from the beginning. Only with the Buddha doesthe idea of a goal emerge, namely, the overcoming of earthlyexistence.The mythic needs of the Occidental call for an evolutionarycosmogony with a beginning and a goal. The Occidental rebelsagainst a cosmogony with a beginning and mere end, just as hecannot accept the idea of a static, self-contained, eternal cycle ofevents. The Oriental, on the other hand, seems able to come toterms with this idea. Apparently there is no unanimous feeling aboutthe nature of the world, any more than there is general agreementamong contemporary astronomers on this question. T o Westernman, the meaninglessness of a merely static universe isunbearable. He must assume that it has meaning. The Orientaldoes not need to make this assumption; rather, he himselfembodies it. Whereas the Occidental feels the need to completethe meaning of the world, the Oriental strives for the fulfillment ofmeaning in man, stripping the world and existence from himself(Buddha).I would say that both are right. Western man seems predominantlyextraverted, Eastern man predominantly introverted. The former

projects the meaning and considers that it exists in objects; thelatter feels the meaning in himself. But the meaning is both withoutand within.The idea of rebirth is inseparable from that of karma. The crucialquestion is whether a man's karma is personal or not. If it is, thenthe preordained destiny with which a man enters life represents anachievement of previous lives, and a personal continuity thereforeexists. If, however, this is not so, and an impersonal karma isseized upon in the act of birth, then that karma is incarnated againwithout there being any personal continuity.Buddha was twice asked by his disciples whether man's karma ispersonal or not. Each time he fended off the question, and did notgo into the matter; to know this, he said, would not contribute toliberating oneself from the illusion of existence. Buddha consideredit far more useful for his disciples to meditate upon the Nidanachain, that is, upon birth, life, old age, and death, and upon thecause and effect of suffering.I know no answer to the question of whether the karma which I live isthe outcome of my past lives, or whether it is not rather theachievement of my ancestors, whose heritage comes together inme. Am I a combination of the lives of these ancestors and do Iembody these lives again? Have I lived before in the past as aspecific personality, and did I progress so far in that life that I amnow able to seek a solution? I do not know. Buddha left the questionopen, and I like to assume that he himself did not know withcertainty.I could well imagine that I might have lived in former centuries andthere encountered questions I was not yet able to answer; that I hadto be born again because I had not fulfilled the task that was givento me. When I die, my deeds will follow along with me that is how I

imagine it. I will bring with me what I have done. In the meantime it isimportant to insure that I do not stand at the end with empty hands.Buddha, too, seems to have had this thought when he tried to keephis disciples from wasting time on useless speculation.The meaning of my existence is that life has addressed a questionto me. Or, conversely, I myself am a question which is addressed tothe world, and I must communicate my answer, for otherwise I amdependent upon the world's answer. That is a suprapersonal lifetask, which I accomplish only by effort and with difficulty. Perhaps itis a question which preoccupied my ancestors, and which theycould not answer. Could that be why I am so impressed by the factthat the conclusion of Faust contains no solution? Or by the problemon which Nietzsche foundered: the Dionysian side of life, to whichthe Christian seems to have lost the way? Or is it the restlessWotan-Hermes of my Alemannic and Prankish ancestors whoposes challenging riddles?What I feel to be the resultant of my ancestors' lives, or a karmaacquired in a previous personal life, might perhaps equally well bean impersonal archetype which today presses hard on everyoneand has taken a particular hold upon me an archetype such as, forexample, the development over the centuries of the divine triad andits confrontation with the feminine principle; or the still pendinganswer to the Gnostic question as to the origin of evil, or, to put itanother way, the incompleteness of the Christian God-image.I also think of the possibility that through the achievement of anindividual a question enters the world, to which he must providesome kind of answer. For example, my way of posing the questionas well as my answer may be unsatisfactory. That being so,someone who has my karma or I myself would have to be reborn inorder to give a more complete answer. It might happen that I wouldnot be reborn again so long as the world needed no such answer,

and that I would be entitled to several hundred years of peace untilsomeone was once more needed who took an interest in thesematters and could profitably tackle the task anew. I imagine that fora while a period of rest could ensue, until the stint I had done in mylifetime needed to be taken up again.The question of karma is obscure to me, as is also the problem ofpersonal rebirth or of the transmigration of souls. "WIth a free andopen mind" I listen attentively to the Indian doctrine of rebirth, andlook around in the world of my own experience to see whethersomewhere and somehow there is some authentic sign pointingtoward reincarnation. Naturally, I do not count the relativelynumerous testimonies, here in the West, to the belief inreincarnation. A belief proves to me only the phenomenon of belief,not the content of the belief. This I must see revealed empirically inorder to accept it. Until a few years ago I could not discoveranything convincing in this respect, although I kept a sharp lookoutfor any such signs. Recently, however, I observed in myself a seriesof dreams which would seem to describe the process ofreincarnation in a deceased person of my acquaintance. But I havenever come across any such dreams in other persons, andtherefore have no basis for comparison. Since this observation issubjective and unique, I prefer only to mention its existence and notto go into it any further. I must confess, however, that after thisexperience I view the problem of reincarnation with somewhatdifferent eyes, though without being in a position to assert a definiteopinion.If we assume that life continues "there," we cannot conceive of anyother form of existence except a psychic one; for the life of thepsyche requires no space and no time. Psychic existence, andabove all the inner images with which we are here concerned,supply the material for all mythic speculations about a life in thehereafter, and I imagine that life as a continuance in the world of

images. Thus the psyche might be that existence in which thehereafter or the land of the dead is located.From the psychological point of view, life in the hereafter wouldseem to be a logical continuation of the psychic life of old age. Withincreasing age, contemplation, and reflection, the inner imagesnaturally play an ever greater part in man's life. "Y our old men shalldream dreams".[3] That, to be sure, presupposes that the psychesof the old men have not become wooden, or entirely petrified seromedicina paratur cum mala per longas convaluere moras.[4] In oldage one begins to let memories unroll before the mind's eye and,musing, to recognize oneself in the inner and outer images of thepast. This is like a preparation for an existence in the hereafter, justas, in Plato's view, philosophy is a preparation for death.The inner images keep me from getting lost in personalretrospection. Many old people become too involved in theirreconstruction of past events. They remain imprisoned in thesememories. But if it is reflective and is translated into images,retrospection can be a reculer pour mieux sauter. I try to see the linewhich leads through my life into the world, and out of the worldagain.In general, the conception people form of the hereafter is largelymade up of wishful thinking and prejudices. Thus in mostconceptions the hereafter is pictured as a pleasant place. Thatdoes not seem so obvious to me. I hardly think that after death weshall be spirited to some lovely flowering meadow. If everythingwere pleasant and good in the hereafter, surely there would besome friendly communication between us and the blessed spirits,and an outpouring upon us of goodness and beauty from theprenatal state. But there is nothing of the sort. Why is there thisinsurmountable barrier between the departed and the living? Atleast half the reports of encounters with the dead tell of terrifying

experiences with dark spirits; and it is the rule that the land of thedead observes icy silence, unperturbed by the grief of thebereaved.3 Acts 2:17; Joel 2:28.4 The medicine is prepared too late, when the illness has grown strong bylong delay.To  f o l l o w o ut  t he  t ho ug ht  t ha t  i nvo l unt a r i l y c o m e s  t o  m e :  t he  wo r l d ,  Ifeel, is far too unitary for there to be a hereafter in which the rule ofopposites is completely absent. There, too, is nature, which after itsfashion is also God's. The world into which we enter after death willbe grand and terrible, like God and like all of nature that we know.Nor can I conceive that suffering should entirely cease. Granted thatwhat I experienced in my 1944 visions liberation from the burden ofthe body, and perception of meaning gave me the deepest bliss.Nevertheless, there was darkness too, and a strange cessation ofhuman warmth. Remember the black rock to which I came! It wasdark and of the hardest granite. What does that mean? If there wereno imperfections, no primordial defect in the ground of creation,why should there be any urge to create, any longing for what mustyet be fulfilled? Why should the gods be the least bit concernedabout man and creation? About the continuation of the Nidanachain to infinity? After all, the Buddha opposes to the painful illusionof existence his quod non, and the Christian hopes for the swiftcoming of this world's end.It seems probable to me that in the hereafter, too, there exist certainlimitations, but that the souls of the dead only gradually find outwhere the limits of the liberated state lie. Somewhere "out there"there must be a determinant, a necessity conditioning the world,which seeks to put an end to the after-death state. This creativedeterminant so I imagine it must decide what souls will plungeagain into birth. Certain souls, I imagine, feel the state of three-

dimensional existence to be more blissful than that of Eternity. Butperhaps that depends upon how much of completeness orincompleteness they have taken across with them from their humanexistence.It is possible that any further spell of three-dimensional life wouldhave no more meaning once the soul had reached a certain stageof understanding; it would then no longer have to return, fullerunderstanding having put to rout the desire for re-embodiment.Then the soul would vanish from the three-dimensional world andattain what the Buddhists call nirvana. But if a karma still remains tobe disposed of, then the soul relapses again into desires andreturns to life once more, perhaps even doing so out of therealization that something remains to be completed.In my case it must have been primarily a passionate urge towardunderstanding which brought about my birth. For that is thestrongest element in my nature. This insatiable drive towardunderstanding has, as it were, created a consciousness in order toknow what is and what happens, and in order to piece togethermythic conceptions from the slender hints of the unknowable.We lack concrete proof that anything of us is preserved for eternity.At most we can say that there is some probability that something ofour psyche continues beyond physical death. Whether whatcontinues to exist is conscious of itself, we do not know either. If wefeel the need to form some opinion on this question, we mightpossibly consider what has been learned from the phenomena ofpsychic dissociation. In most cases where a split-off complexmanifests itself it does so in the form of a personality, as if thecomplex had a consciousness of itself. Thus the voices heard bythe insane are personified. I dealt long ago with this phenomenon ofpersonified complexes in my doctoral dissertation. We might, if wewish, adduce these complexes as evidence for a continuity of

consciousness. Likewise in favor of such an assumption are certainastonishing observations in cases of profound syncope after acuteinjuries to the brain and in severe states of collapse. In bothsituations, total loss of consciousness can be accompanied byperceptions of the outside world and vivid dream experiences.Since the cerebral cortex, the seat of consciousness, is notfunctioning at these times, there is as yet no explanation for suchphenomena. They may be evidence for at least a subjectivepersistence of the capacity for consciousness even in a state ofapparent unconsciousness. [5] The thorny problem of therelationship between eternal man, the self and earthly man in timeand space was illuminated by two dreams of mine.5 Cf . "Synchronicity: An Acausal Connecting Principle," in The Structureand Dynamics of the Psyche ( CW 8 ) , pp. 506 ff.In one dream, which I had in October 1958, I caught sight from myhouse of two lens-shaped metallically gleaming disks, which hurtledin a narrow arc over the house and down to the lake. They were twoUFOs (Unidentified Flying Objects). Then another body came flyingdirectly toward me. It was a perfectly circular lens, like the objectiveof a telescope. At a distance of four or five hundred yards it stoodstill for a moment, and then flew off. Immediately afterward, anothercame speeding through the air: a lens with a metallic extensionwhich led to a box a magic lantern. At a distance of sixty or seventyyards it stood still in the air, pointing straight at me. I awoke with afeeling of astonishment. Still half in the dream, the thought passedthrough my head: "We always think that the UFOs are projections ofours. Now it turns out that we are their projections. I am projected bythe magic lantern as C. G. Jung. But who manipulates theapparatus?"I had dreamed once before of the problem of the self and the ego.In that earlier dream I was on a hiking trip. I was walking along a

little road through a hilly landscape; the sun was shining and I had awide view in all directions. Then I came to a small wayside chapel.The door was ajar, and I went in. To my surprise there was noimage of the Virgin on the altar, and no crucifix either, but only awonderful flower arrangement. But then I saw that on the floor infront of the altar, facing me, sat a yogi in lotus posture, in deepmeditation. When I looked at him more closely, I realized that hehad my face. I started in profound fright, and awoke with the thought:"Aha, so he is the one who is meditating me. He has a dream, and Iam it." I knew that when he awakened, I would no longer be.I had this dream after my illness in 1944. It is a parable: My selfretires into meditation and meditates my earthly form. T o put itanother way: it assumes human shape in order to enter three-dimensional existence, as if someone were putting on a diver's suitin order to dive into the sea. When it renounces existence in thehereafter, the self assumes a religious posture, as the chapel in thedream shows. In earthly form it can pass through the experiences ofthe three-dimensional world, and by greater awareness take afurther step toward realization.The figure of the yogi, then, would more or less represent myunconscious prenatal wholeness, and the Far East, as is often thecase in dreams, a psychic state alien and opposed to our own. Likethe magic lantern, the yogi's meditation "projects" my empiricalreality. As a rule, we see this causal relationship in reverse: in theproducts of the unconscious we discover mandala symbols, that is,circular and quaternary figures which express wholeness, andwhenever we wish to express wholeness, we employ just suchfigures. Our basis is ego-consciousness, our world the field of lightcentered upon the focal point of the ego. From that point we lookout upon an enigmatic world of obscurity, never knowing to whatextent the shadowy forms we see are caused by ourconsciousness, or possess a reality of their own. The superficial

observer is content with the first assumption. But closer studyshows that as a rule the images of the unconscious are notproduced by consciousness, but have a reality and spontaneity oftheir own, Nevertheless, we regard them as mere marginalphenomena.The aim of both these dreams is to effect a reversal of therelationship between ego-consciousness and the unconscious, andto represent the unconscious as the generator of the empiricalpersonality. This reversal suggests that in the opinion of the "otherside," our unconscious existence is the real one and our consciousworld a kind of illusion, an apparent reality constructed for a specificpurpose, like a dream which seems a reality as long as we are in it.It is clear that this state of affairs resembles very closely the Orientalconception of Maya. [6]Unconscious wholeness therefore seems to me the true spiritusrector of all biological and psychic events. Here is a principle whichstrives for total realization which in man's case signifies theattainment of total consciousness. Attainment of consciousness isculture in the broadest sense, and self-knowledge is therefore theheart and essence of this process. The Oriental attributesunquestionably divine significance to the self, and according to theancient Christian view self-knowledge is the road to knowledge ofGod.6 A tendency to question the locus of reality manifested itself early in Jung'slife, when as a child he sat upon the stone and toyed with the idea that thestone was saying, or was, "I." Cf. the well-known butterfly dream inChuangtzu. A. J.The decisive question for man is: Is he related to something infiniteor not? That is the telling question of his life. Only if we know that thething which truly matters is the infinite can we avoid fixing our

interest upon futilities, and upon all kinds of goals which are not ofreal importance. Thus we demand that the world grant usrecognition for qualities which we regard as personal possessions:our talent or our beauty. The more a man lays stress on falsepossessions, and the less sensitivity he has for what is essential,the less satisfying is his life. He feels limited because he haslimited aims, and the result is envy and jealousy. If we understandand feel that here in this life we already have a link with the infinite,desires and attitudes change. In the final analysis, we count forsomething only because of the essential we embody, and if we donot embody that, life is wasted. In our relationships to other men,too, the crucial question is whether an element of boundlessness isexpressed in the relationship.The feeling for the infinite, however, can be attained only if we arebounded to the utmost. The greatest limitation for man is the "self";it is manifested in the experience: "I am only that!" Onlyconsciousness of our narrow confinement in the self forms the linkto the limitlessness of the unconscious. In such awareness weexperience ourselves concurrently as limited and eternal, as boththe one and the other. In knowing ourselves to be unique in ourpersonal combination that is, ultimately limited we possess also thecapacity for becoming conscious of the infinite. But only then!In an era which has concentrated exclusively upon extension ofliving space and increase of rational knowledge at all costs, it is asupreme challenge to ask man to become conscious of hisuniqueness and his limitation. Uniqueness and limitation aresynonymous. Without them, no perception of the unlimited ispossible--and, consequently, no coming to consciousness either--merely a delusory identity with it which takes the form of intoxicationwith large numbers and an avidity for political power.Our age has shifted all emphasis to the here and now, and thus

brought about a daemonization of man and his world. Thephenomenon of dictators and all the misery they have wroughtsprings from the fact that man has been robbed of transcendenceby the shortsightedness of the super-intellectuals. Like them, he hasfallen a victim to unconsciousness. But man's task is the exactopposite: to become conscious of the contents that press upwardfrom the unconscious. Neither should he persist in hisunconsciousness, nor remain identical with the unconsciouselements of his being, thus evading his destiny, which is to createmore and more consciousness. As far as we can discern, the solepurpose of human existence is to kindle a light in the darkness ofmere being. It may even be assumed that just as the unconsciousaffects us, so the increase in our consciousness affects theunconscious.

XII

Late ThoughtsANY BIOGRAPHY of myself , must, I think, take account of thefollowing reflections. It is true that they may well strike others ashighly theoretical, but making "theory" [1] of this sort is as much apart of me, as vital a function of mine, as eating and drinking.What is remarkable about Christianity is that in its system of dogmait anticipates a metamorphosis in the divinity , a process of historicchange on the "other side." It does this in the form of the new mythof dissension in heaven, first alluded to in the creation myth in whicha serpent-like antagonist of the Creator appears, and lures man todisobedience by the promise of increased conscious knowledge(scientes bonum et malum), The second allusion is to the fall of theangels, a premature invasion of the human world by unconsciouscontents. The angels are a strange genus: they are precisely whatthey are and cannot be anything else. They are in themselvessoulless beings who1 In the original sense of the Greek theorein, 'looking about the world," orthe German Weltanschauung. A. J.represent nothing but the thoughts and intuitions of their Lord.Angels who fall, then, are exclusively "bad" angels. These releasethe well-known effect of "inflation" which we can also observenowadays in the megalomania of dictators: the angels beget withmen a race of giants which ends by threatening to devour mankind,as is told in the book of Enoch.The third and decisive stage of the myth, however, is the self-realization of God in human form, in fulfillment of the Old Testament

idea of the divine marriage and its consequences. As early as theperiod of primitive Christianity, the idea of the incarnation had beenrefined to include the intuition of "Christ within us." Thus theunconscious wholeness penetrated into the psychic realm of innerexperience, and man was made aware of all that entered into histrue configuration. This was a decisive step, not only for man, butalso for the Creator Who, in the eyes of those who had beendelivered from darkness, cast off His dark qualities and becamethe summum bonum.This myth remained unassailably vital for a millennium until the firstsigns of a further transformation of consciousness began appearingin the eleventh century . [2] From then on, the symptoms of unrestand doubt increased, until at the end of the second millennium theoutlines of a universal catastrophe became apparent, at first in theform of a threat to consciousness. This threat consists in giantism inother words, a hubris of consciousness in the assertion: "Nothing isgreater than man and his deeds." The otherworldliness, thetranscendence of the Christian myth was lost, and with it the viewthat wholeness is achieved in the other world.Light is followed by shadow, the other side of the Creator. Thisdevelopment reached its peak in the twentieth century. TheChristian world is now truly confronted by the principle of evil, bynaked injustice, tyranny, lies, slavery, and coercion of conscience.This manifestation of naked evil has assumed apparentlypermanent form in the Russian nation; but its first violent eruptioncame in Germany. That outpouring of evil revealed to what extentChristianity has been undermined in2 See Aion ( CW 9, u), pp. 8a ff.the twentieth century. In the face of that, evil can no longer beminimized by the euphemism of the privatio boni. Evil has become

a determinant reality. It can no longer be dismissed from the worldby a circumlocution. We must learn how to handle it, since it is hereto stay. How we can live with it without terrible consequencescannot for the present be conceived.In any case, we stand in need of a reorientation, a metanoia.To uc hi ng  e vi l  b r i ng s  wi t h i t  t he  g r a ve  p e r i l  o f  s uc c um b i ng  t o  i t .  Wemust, therefore, no longer succumb to anything at all, not even togood. A so-called good to which we succumb loses its ethicalcharacter. Not that there is anything bad in it on that score, but tohave succumbed to it may breed trouble. Every form of addiction isbad, no matter whether the narcotic be alcohol or morphine oridealism. We must beware of thinking of good and evil as absoluteopposites. The criterion of ethical action can no longer consist inthe simple view that good has the force of a categorical imperative,while so-called evil can resolutely be shunned. Recognition of thereality of evil necessarily relativizes the good, and the evil likewise,converting both into halves of a paradoxical whole.In practical terms, this means that good and evil are no longer soself-evident. We have to realize that each represents a judgment. Inview of the fallibility of all human judgment, we cannot believe thatwe will always judge rightly. We might so easily be the victims ofmisjudgment. The ethical problem is affected by this principle onlyto the extent that we become somewhat uncertain about moralevaluations. Nevertheless we have to make ethical decisions. Therelativity of "good" and "evil" by no means signifies that thesecategories are invalid, or do not exist. Moral judgment is alwayspresent and carries with it characteristic psychologicalconsequences. I have pointed out many times that as in the past, soin the future the wrong we have done, thought, or intended willwreak its vengeance on our souls. Only the contents of judgmentare subject to the differing conditions of time and place and,therefore, take correspondingly different forms. For moral

evaluation is always founded upon the apparent certitudes of amoral code which pretends to know precisely what is good andwhat evil. But once we know how uncertain the foundation is, ethicaldecision becomes a subjective, creative act. We can convinceourselves of its validity only Deo concedente that is, there must be aspontaneous and decisive impulse on the part of the unconscious.Ethics itself, the decision between good and evil, is not affected bythis impulse, only made more difficult for us. Nothing can spare usthe torment of ethical decision. Nevertheless, harsh as it maysound, we must have the freedom in some circumstances to avoidthe known moral good and do what is considered to be evil, if ourethical decision so requires. In other words, again: we must notsuccumb to either of the opposites. A useful pattern is provided bythe neti-neti of Indian philosophy. In given cases, the moral code isundeniably abrogated and ethical choice is left to the individual. Initself there is nothing new about this idea; in pre-psychology dayssuch difficult choices were also known and came under the headingof "conflict of duties"As a rule, however, the individual is so unconscious that healtogether fails to see his own potentialities for decision. Instead heis constantly and anxiously looking around for external rules andregulations which can guide him in his perplexity. Aside fromgeneral human inadequacy, a good deal of the blame for this restswith education, which promulgates the old generalizations and saysnothing about the secrets of private experience. Thus, every effort ismade to teach idealistic beliefs or conduct which people know intheir hearts they can never live up to, and such ideals are preachedby officials who know that they themselves have never lived up tothese high standards and never will. What is more, nobody everquestions the value of this kind of teaching.Therefore the individual who wishes to have an answer to the

problem of evil, as it is posed today, has need, first and foremost,of self-knowledge, that is, the utmost possible knowledge of his ownwholeness. He must know relentlessly how much good he can do,and what crimes he is capable of, and must beware of regardingthe one as real and the other as illusion. Both are elements withinhis nature, and both are bound to come to light in him, should hewish as he ought to live without self-deception or self-delusion.In general, however, most people are hopelessly ill equipped forliving on this level, although there are also many persons today whohave the capacity for profounder insight into themselves. Such self-knowledge is of prime importance, because through it we approachthat fundamental stratum or core of human nature where theinstincts dwell. Here are those pre- existent dynamic factors whichultimately govern the ethical decisions of our consciousness. Thiscore is the unconscious and its contents, concerning which wecannot pass any final judgment. Our ideas about it are bound to beinadequate, for we are unable to comprehend its essencecognitively and set rational limits to it. We achieve knowledge ofnature only through science, which enlarges consciousness; hencedeepened self-knowledge also requires science, that is,psychology. No one builds a telescope or microscope with one turnof the wrist, out of good will alone, without a knowledge of optics.To d a y we  ne e d  p s yc ho l o g y f o r  r e a s o ns  t ha t  i nvo l ve  o ur  ve r yexistence. We stand perplexed and stupefied before thephenomenon of Nazism and Bolshevism because we know nothingabout man, or at any rate have only a lopsided and distorted pictureof him. If we had self-knowledge, that would not be the case. Westand face to face with the terrible question of evil and do not evenknow what is before us, let alone what to pit against it. And even ifwe did know, we still could not understand "how it could happenhere." With glorious naivete a statesman comes out with the prouddeclaration that he has no "imagination for evil". Quite right: we

have no imagination for evil, but evil has us in its grip. Some do notwant to know this, and others are identified with evil. That is thepsychological situation in the world today: some call themselvesChristian and imagine that they can trample so-called evil underfootby merely willing to; others have succumbed to it and no longer seethe good. Evil today has become a visible Great Power. One half ofhumanity battens and grows strong on a doctrine fabricated byhuman ratiocination; the other half sickens from the lack of a mythcommensurate with the situation. The Christian nations have cometo a sorry pass; their Christianity slumbers and has neglected todevelop its myth further in the course of the centuries.Those who gave expression to the dark stirrings of growth in mythicideas were refused a hearing; Gioacchino da Fiore, MeisterEckhart, Jacob Boehme, and many others have remainedobscurantists for the majority. The only ray of light is Pius XII and hisdogma. [3] But people do not even know what I am referring towhen I say this. They do not realize that a myth is dead if it no longerlives and grows.Our myth has become mute, and gives no answers. The fault liesnot in it as it is set down in the Scriptures, but solely in us, who havenot developed it further, who, rather, have suppressed any suchattempts. The original version of the myth offers ample points ofdeparture and possibilities of development. For example, the wordsare put into Christ's mouth: "Be ye therefore wise as serpents, andharmless as doves." For what purpose do men need the cunning ofserpents? And what is the link between this cunning and theinnocence of the dove? "Except ye become as little children..." Whogives thought to what children are like in reality? By what moralitydid the Lord justify the taking of the ass which he needed in order toride in triumph into Jerusalem? How was it that, shortly afterward,he put on a display of childish bad temper and cursed the fig tree?

What kind of morality emerges from the parable of the unjuststeward, and what profound insight, of such far-reachingsignificance for our own predicament, from the apocryphal logion:"Man, if thou knowest what thou dost, thou art blessed; but if thouknowest not, thou art accursed and a transgressor of the law"? [4]What, finally, does it mean when St. Paul confesses: "The evil whichI would not, that I do"? I will not discuss the transparent propheciesof the Book of Revelation, because no one believes in them and thewhole subject is felt to be an embarrassing one.The old question posed by the Gnostics, "Whence comes evil?"has been given no answer by the Christian world, and Origen'scautious suggestion of a possible redemption of the devil wastermed a heresy. T oday we are compelled to meet that question;but we stand empty-handed, bewildered, and perplexed, andcannot even get it into our heads that no myth will come to our3 See above, Chap. VII, n. , p. 202.4 Codex Bezae ad Lucam 6, 4.aid although we have such urgent need of one. As the result of thepolitical situation and the frightful, not to say diabolic, triumphs ofscience, we are shaken by secret shudders and dark forebodings;but we know no way out, and very few persons indeed draw theconclusion that this time the issue is the long-since-forgotten soul ofman.A further development of myth might well begin with the outpouringof the Holy Spirit upon the apostles, by which they were made intosons of God, and not only they, but all others who through them andafter them received the filiatio--sonship of God--and thus partook ofthe certainty that they were more than autochthonous animaliasprung from the earth, that as the twice-born they had their roots inthe divinity itself. Their visible, physical life was on this earth; but the

the divinity itself. Their visible, physical life was on this earth; but theinvisible inner man had come from and would return to theprimordial image of wholeness, to the eternal Father, as theChristian myth of salvation puts it.Just as the Creator is whole, so His creature, His son, ought to bewhole. Nothing can take away from the concept of divinewholeness. But unbeknownst to all, a splitting of that wholenessensued; there emerged a realm of light and a realm of darkness.This outcome, even before Christ appeared, was clearly prefigured,as we may observe inter alia in the experience of Job, or in thewidely disseminated Book of Enoch, which belongs to immediatepre-Christian times. In Christianity, too, this meta-physical split wasplainly perpetuated: Satan, who in the Old T estament still belongedto the intimate entourage of Y ahweh, now formed the diametricaland eternal opposite of the divine world. He could not be uprooted.It is therefore not surprising that as early as the beginning of theeleventh century the belief arose that the devil, not God, hadcreated the world. Thus the keynote was struck for the second halfof the Christian aeon, after the myth of the fall of the angels hadalready explained that these fallen angels had taught men adangerous knowledge of science and the arts. What would theseold storytellers have to say about Hiroshima?The visionary genius of Jacob Boehme recognized the paradoxicalnature of the God-image and thus contributed to the furtherdevelopment of the myth. The mandala symbol sketched byBoehme [5] is a representation of the split God, for the inner circleis divided into two semicircles standing back to back.Since dogma holds that God is wholly present in each of the threePersons, He is also wholly present in each part of the out- pouredHoly Spirit; thus every man can partake of the whole of God andhence of the filiation. The complexio oppositorum of the God-imagethus enters into man, and not as unity, but as conflict, the dark half of

the image coming into opposition with the accepted view that Godis "Light." This very process is taking place in our own times, albeitscarcely recognized by the official teachers of humanity whose task,supposedly, is to understand such matters. There is the generalfeeling, to be sure, that we have reached a significant turning pointin the ages, but people imagine that the great change has to dowith nuclear fission and fusion, or with space rockets. What isconcurrently taking place in the human psyche is usuallyoverlooked.Insofar as the God-image is, from the psychological point of view, amanifestation of the ground of the psyche, and insofar as thecleavage in that image is becoming clear to mankind as a profounddichotomy which penetrates even into world politics, acompensation has arisen. This takes the form of circular symbols ofunity which represent a synthesis of the opposites within thepsyche. I refer to the worldwide rumors of Unidentified FlyingObjects, of which we began to hear as early as 1943. These rumorsare founded either upon visions or upon actual phenomena. Theusual story about the UFOs is that they are some kind of spacecraftcoming from other planets or even from the fourth dimension.More than twenty years earlier (in 1918), in the course of myinvestigations of the collective unconscious, I discovered thepresence of an apparently universal symbol of a similar type themandala symbol. T o make sure of my case, I spent more than adecade amassing additional data, before announcing my discoveryfor the first time. [6] The mandala is an archetypal image5 Reproduced in The Archetypes and the Collective Unconscious (CW 9, i),p. 297.6 In the commentary to The Secret of the Golden Flower ( 1931) (CW 13).whose occurrence is attested throughout the ages. It signifies the

wholeness of the self. This circular image represents the wholenessof the psychic ground or, to put it in mythic terms, the divinityincarnate in man. In contrast to Boehme's mandala, the modernones strive for unity; they represent a compensation of the psychiccleavage, or an anticipation that the cleavage will be surmounted.Since this process takes place in the collective unconscious, itmanifests itself everywhere. The worldwide stories of the UFOs areevidence of that; they are the symptom of a universally presentpsychic disposition.Insofar as analytical treatment makes the "shadow" conscious, itcauses a cleavage and a tension of opposites which in their turnseek compensation in unity. The adjustment is achieved throughsymbols. The conflict between the opposites can strain our psycheto the breaking point, if we take them seriously, or if they take usseriously. The tertium non datur of logic proves its worth: no solutioncan be seen. If all goes well, the solution, seemingly of its ownaccord, appears out of nature. Then and then only is it convincing. Itis felt as "grace" Since the solution proceeds out of theconfrontation and clash of opposites, it is usually an unfathomablemixture of conscious and unconscious factors, and therefore asymbol, a coin split into two halves which fit together precisely . [7] Itrepresents the result of the joint labors of consciousness and theunconscious, and attains the likeness of the God-image in the formof the mandala, which is probably the simplest model of a conceptof wholeness, and one which spontaneously arises in the mind as arepresentation of the struggle and reconciliation of opposites. Theclash, which is at first of a purely personal nature, is soon followedby the insight that the subjective conflict is only a single instance ofthe universal conflict of opposites. Our psyche is set up in accordwith the structure of the universe, and what happens in themacrocosm likewise happens in the infinitesimal and mostsubjective reaches of the psyche. For that reason the God-image is

always a projection of the inner experience of a powerful vis-a-vis.This is symbolized by objects from which7 One of the meanings of symbolon is the tessera hospitalitatis betweenhost and guest, the broken coin which is shared between two partingfriends. A. J.the inner experience has taken its initial impulse, and which fromthen on preserve numinous significance, or else it is char- acterizedby its numinosity and the overwhelming force of that numinosity. Inthis way the imagination liberates itself from the concretism of theobject and attempts to sketch the image of the invisible assomething which stands behind the phenomenon. I am thinking hereof the simplest basic form of the mandala, the circle, and thesimplest (mental) division of the circle, the quadrant or, as the casemay be, the cross.Such experiences have a helpful or, it may be, annihilating effectupon man. He cannot grasp, comprehend, dominate them; nor canhe free himself or escape from them, and therefore feels them asoverpowering. Recognizing that they do not spring from hisconscious personality, he calls them mana, daimon, or God.Science employs the term "the unconscious," thus admitting that itknows nothing about it, for it can know nothing about the substanceof the psyche when the sole means of knowing anything is thepsyche. Therefore the validity of such terms as mana, daimon, orGod can be neither disproved nor affirmed. We can, however,establish that the sense of strangeness connected with theexperience of something objective, apparently outside the psyche,is indeed authentic.We know that something unknown, alien, does come our way, justas we know that we do not ourselves make a dream or aninspiration, but that it somehow arises of its own accord. What does

happen to us in this manner can be said to emanate from mana,from a daimon, a god, or the unconscious. The first three termshave the great merit of including and evoking the emotional qualityof numinosity, whereas the latter the unconscious is banal andtherefore closer to reality. This latter concept includes the empiricalrealm that is, the commonplace reality we know so well. Theunconscious is too neutral and rational a term to give much impetusto the imagination. The term, after all, was coined for scientificpurposes, and is far better suited to dispassionate observationwhich makes no meta-physical claims than are the transcendentalconcepts, which are controversial and therefore tend to breedfanaticism.Hence I prefer the term "the unconscious," knowing that I mightequally well speak of "God" or "daimon" if I wished to expressmyself in mythic language. When I do use such mythic language, Iam aware that "mana," "daimon," and "God" are synonyms for theunconscious that is to say, we know just as much or just as littleabout them as about the latter. People only believe they know muchmore about them and for certain purposes that belief is far moreuseful and effective than a scientific concept. The great advantageof the concepts "daimon" and "God" lies in making possible amuch better objectification of the vis-a-vis, namely, a personificationof it. Their emotional quality confers life and effectuality upon them.Hate and love, fear and reverence, enter the scene of theconfrontation and raise it to a drama. What has merely been"displayed" becomes "acted." [8] The whole man is challenged andenters the fray with his total reality. Only then can he become wholeand only then can "God be born," that is, enter into human realityand associate with man in the form of "man." By this act ofincarnation man that is, his ego is inwardly replaced by "God," andGod becomes outwardly man, in keeping with the saying of Jesus:"Who sees me, sees the Father."

It is at this point that the shortcomings of mythic terminologybecome apparent. The Christian's ordinary conception of God is ofan omnipotent, omniscient, and all-merciful Father and Creator ofthe world. If this God wishes to become man, an incredible kenosis(emptying) [9] is required of Him, in order to reduce His totality tothe infinitesimal human scale. Even then it is hard to see why thehuman frame is not shattered by the incarnation. Theologicalthinkers have therefore felt it necessary to equip Jesus withqualities which raise him above ordinary human existence. Aboveall he lacks the macula peccati (stain of original sin). For thatreason, if for no other, he is at least a god-man or a demigod. TheChristian God-image cannot become incarnate in empirical manwithout contradictions quite apart from the fact that man with all hisexternal characteristics seems little suited to representing a god.8 Cf. "Transformation Symbolism in the Mass," in Psychology and Religion:West and East (CW 11), pp. 249-509 Philippians 2: 6.The myth must ultimately take monotheism seriously and put asideits dualism, which, however much repudiated officially , haspersisted until now and enthroned an eternal dark antagonistalongside the omnipotent Good. Room must be made within thesystem for the philosophical complexio oppositorum of Nicholas ofCusa and the moral ambivalence of Jacob Boehme; only thus canthe One God be granted the wholeness and the synthesis ofopposites which should be His. It is a fact that symbols, by their verynature, can so unite the opposites that these no longer diverge orclash, but mutually supplement one another and give meaningfulshape to life. Once that has been experienced, the ambivalence inthe image of a nature-god or Creator-god ceases to presentdifficulties. On the contrary, the myth of the necessary incarnation ofGod the essence of the Christian message can then be understoodas man's creative confrontation with the opposites and their

synthesis in the self, the wholeness of his personality. Theunavoidable internal contradictions in the image of a Creator-godcan be reconciled in the unity and wholeness of the self as theconiunctio oppositorum of the alchemists or as a unio mystica. Inthe experience of the self it is no longer the opposites "God" and"man" that are reconciled, as it was before, but rather the oppositeswithin the God-image itself. That is the meaning of divine service, ofthe service which man can render to God, that light may emergefrom the darkness, that the Creator may become conscious of Hiscreation, and man conscious of himself.That is the goal, or one goal, which fits man meaningfully into thescheme of creation, and at the same time confers meaning upon it.It is an explanatory myth which has slowly taken shape within me inthe course of the decades. It is a goal I can acknowledge andesteem, and which therefore satisfies me.By virtue of his reflective faculties, man is raised out of the animalworld, and by his mind he demonstrates that nature has put a highpremium precisely upon the developmerit of consciousness.Through consciousness he takes possession of nature byrecognizing the existence of the world and thus, as it were,confirming the Creator. The world becomes the phenomenal world,for without conscious reflection it would not be. If the Creator wereconscious of Himself, He would not need conscious creatures; noris it probable that the extremely indirect methods of creation, whichsquander millions of years upon the development of countlessspecies and creatures, are the outcome of purposeful intention.Natural history tells us of a haphazard and casual transformation ofspecies over hundreds of millions of years of devouring and beingdevoured. The biological and political history of man is an elaboraterepetition of the same thing. But the history of the mind offers adifferent picture. Here the miracle of reflecting consciousnessintervenes the second cosmogony . The importance of

consciousness is so great that one cannot help suspecting theelement of meaning to be concealed somewhere within all themonstrous, apparently senseless biological turmoil, and that theroad to its manifestation was ultimately found on the level of warm-blooded vertebrates possessed of a differentiated brain found as ifby chance, unintended and unforeseen, and yet somehow sensed,felt and groped for out of some dark urge.I do not imagine that in my reflections on the meaning of man andhis myth I have uttered a final truth, but I think that this is what can besaid at the end of our aeon of the Fishes, and perhaps must besaid in view of the coming aeon of Aquarius (the Water Bearer),who has a human figure and is next to the sign of the Fishes. This isa coniunctio oppositorum composed of two fishes in reverse. TheWater Bearer seems to represent the self. With a sovereigngesture he pours the contents of his jug into the mouth of Piscisaustrinus which symbolizes a son, a still unconscious content. Out ofthis unconscious content will emerge, after the passage of anotheraeon of more than two thousand years, a future whose features areindicated by the symbol of Capricorn: an aigokeros, the monstrosityof the Goat-Fish, [11] symbolizing the mountains and the depths ofthe sea, a polarity10 Constellation of the "Southern Fish." Its mouth is formed by Fomalhaut(Arabic for "mouth of the fish" ) below the constellation of the Water Bearer. 11 The constellation of Capricorn was originally called the "Goat-Fish."made up of two undifferentiated animal elements which have growntogether. This strange being could easily be the primordial image ofa Creator-god confronting "man," the Anthropos. On this questionthere is a silence within me, as there is in the empirical data at mydisposal the products of the unconscious of other people with whichI am acquainted, or historical documents. If insight does not come

by itself, speculation is pointless. It makes sense only when wehave objective data comparable to our material on the aeon ofAquarius.We do not know how far the process of coming to consciousnesscan extend, or where it will lead. It is a new element in the story ofcreation, and there are no parallels we can look to. We thereforecannot know what potentialities are inherent in it. Neither can weknow the prospects for the species Homo sapiens. Will it imitatethe fate of other species, which once flourished on the earth andnow are extinct? Biology can advance no reasons why this shouldnot be so.The need for mythic statements is satisfied when we frame a viewof the world which adequately explains the meaning of humanexistence in the cosmos, a view which springs from our psychicwholeness, from the co-operation between conscious andunconscious. Meaninglessness inhibits fullness of life and istherefore equivalent to illness. Meaning makes a great many thingsendurable perhaps everything. No science will ever replace myth,and a myth cannot be made out of any science. For it is not that"God" is a myth, but that myth is the revelation of a divine life inman. It is not we who invent myth, rather it speaks to us as a Wordof God. The Word of God comes to us, and we have no way ofdistinguishing whether and to what extent it is different from God.There is nothing about this Word that could not be consideredknown and human, except for the manner in which it confronts usspontaneously and places obligations upon us. It is not affected bythe arbitrary operation of our will. We cannot explain an inspiration.Our chief feeling about it is that it is not the result of our ownratiocinations, but that it came to us from elsewhere. And if wehappen to have a precognitive dream, how can we possibly ascribeit to our own powers? After all, often we do not even know, untilsome time afterward, that the dream represented foreknowledge,

or knowledge of something that happened at a distance.The Word happens to us; we suffer it, for we are victims of aprofound uncertainty: with God as a complexio oppositorum, allthings are possible, in the fullest meaning of the phrase. Truth anddelusion, good and evil, are equally possible. Myth is or can beequivocal, like the oracle of Delphi or like a dream. We cannot andought not to repudiate reason; but equally we must cling to the hopethat instinct will hasten to our aid in which case God is supportingus against God, as Job long ago understood. Everything throughwhich the "other will" is expressed proceeds from man his thinking,his words, his images, and even his limitations. Consequently hehas the tendency to refer everything to himself, when he begins tothink in clumsy psychological terms, and decides that everythingproceeds out of his intentions and out of himself. With childlikenaivete he assumes that he knows all his own reaches and knowswhat he is "in himself." Yet all the while he is fatally handicapped bythe weakness of his consciousness and the corresponding fear ofthe unconscious. Therefore he is utterly unable to separate what hehas carefully reasoned out from what has spontaneously flowed tohim from another source. He has no objectivity toward himself andcannot yet regard himself as a phenomenon which he finds inexistence and with which, for better or worse, he is identical. At firsteverything is thrust upon him, everything happens to him, and it isonly by great effort that he finally succeeds in conquering andholding for himself an area of relative freedom.Only when he has won his way to this achievement, and then only, ishe in a position to recognize that he is confronting his instinctivefoundations, given him from the beginning, which he cannot makedisappear, however much he would like to. His beginnings are notby any means mere pasts; they live with him as the constantsubstratum of his existence, and his consciousness is as much

molded by them as by the physical world around him.These facts assail man from without and from within withoverwhelming force. He has summed them up under the idea ofdivinity, has described their effects with the aid of myth, and hasinterpreted this myth as the "Word of God," that is, as theinspiration and revelation of the numen from the "other side."IIThere is no better means of intensifying the treasured feeling ofindividuality than the possession of a secret which the individual ispledged to guard. The very beginnings of societal structures revealthe craving for secret organizations. When no valid secrets reallyexist, mysteries are invented or contrived to which privilegedinitiates are admitted. Such was the case with the Rosicrucians andmany other societies. Among these pseudo-secrets there areironically real secrets of which the initiates are entirely unaware as,for example, in those societies which borrowed their "secret"primarily from the alchemical tradition.The need for ostentatious secrecy is of vital importance on theprimitive level, for the shared secret serves as a cement binding thetribe together. Secrets on the tribal level constitute a helpfulcompensation for lack of cohesion in the individual personality,which is constantly relapsing into the original unconscious identitywith other members of the group. Attainment of the human goal anindividual who is conscious of his own peculiar nature thusbecomes a long, almost hopeless process of education. For eventhe individuals whose initiation into certain secrets has markedthem out in some way are fundamentally obeying the laws of group

identity , though in their case the group is a socially differentiatedone.The secret society is an intermediary stage on the way toindividuation. The individual is still relying on a collectiveorganization to effect his differentiation for him; that is, he has notyet recognized that it is really the individual's task to differentiatehimself from all the others and stand on his own feet. All collectiveidentities, such as membership in organizations, support of "isms,"and so on, interfere with the fulfillment of this task. Such collectiveidentities are crutches for the lame, shields for the timid, beds forthe lazy, nurseries for the irresponsible; but they are equally sheltersfor the poor and weak, a home port for the shipwrecked, the bosomof a family for orphans, a land of promise for disillusioned vagrantsand weary pilgrims, a herd and a safe fold for lost sheep, and amother providing nourishment and growth. It would therefore bewrong to regard this intermediary stage as a trap; on the contrary,for a long time to come it will represent the only possible form ofexistence for the individual, who nowadays seems more than everthreatened by anonymity. Collective organization is still so essentialtoday that many consider it, with some justification, to be the finalgoal; whereas to call for further steps along the road to autonomyappears like arrogance or hubris, fantasticality, or simply folly.Nevertheless it may be that for sufficient reasons a man feels hemust set out on his own feet along the road to wider realms. It maybe that in all the garbs, shapes, forms, modes, and manners of lifeoffered to him he does not find what is peculiarly necessary for him.He will go alone and be his own company. He will serve as his owngroup, consisting of a variety of opinions and tendencies whichneed not necessarily be marching in the same direction. In fact, hewill be at odds with himself, and will find great difficulty in uniting hisown multiplicity for purposes of common action. Even if he isoutwardly protected by the social forms of the intermediary stage,

he will have no defense against his inner multiplicity. The disunionwithin himself may cause him to give up, to lapse into identity withhis surroundings.Like the initiate of a secret society who has broken free from theundifferentiated collectivity, the individual on his lonely path needs asecret which for various reasons he may not or cannot reveal. Sucha secret reinforces him in the isolation of his individual aims. Agreat many individuals cannot bear this isolation. They are theneurotics, who necessarily play hide-and-seek with others as wellas with themselves, without being able to take the game reallyseriously. As a rule they end by surrendering their individual goal totheir craving for collective conformity a procedure which all theopinions, beliefs, and ideals of their environment encourage.Moreover, no rational arguments prevail against the environment.Only a secret which the individual cannot betray one which he fearsto give away, or which he cannot formulate in words, and whichtherefore seems to belong to the category of crazy ideas canprevent the otherwise inevitable retrogression.The need for such a secret is in many cases so compelling that theindividual finds himself involved in ideas and actions for which he isno longer responsible. He is being motivated neither by caprice norarrogance, but by a dira necessitas which he himself cannotcomprehend. This necessity comes down upon him with savagefatefulness, and perhaps for the first time in his life demonstrates tohim ad oculos the presence of something alien and more powerfulthan himself in his own most personal domain, where he thoughthimself the master. A vivid example is the story of Jacob, whowrestled with the angel and came away with a dislocated hip, but byhis struggle prevented a murder. In those fortunate days, Jacob'sstory was believed without question. A contemporary Jacob, tellingsuch a tale, would be treated to meaningful smiles. He would prefer

not to speak of such matters, especially if he were inclined to havehis private views about the nature of Yahweh's messenger. Thus hewould find himself willy-nilly in possession of a secret that could notbe discussed, and would become a deviant from the collectivity.Naturally, his mental reservation would ultimately come to light,unless he succeeded in playing the hypocrite all his life. But anyonewho attempts to do both, to adjust to his group and at the sametime pursue his individual goal, becomes neurotic. Our modernJacob would be concealing from himself the fact that the angel wasafter all the stronger of the two as he certainly was, for no claimswere ever made that the angel, too, came away with a limp.The man, therefore, who, driven by his daimon, steps beyond thelimits of the intermediary stage, truly enters the "untrodden,untreadable regions".[12] where there are no charted ways and noshelter spreads a protecting roof over his head. There are noprecepts to guide him when he encounters an unforeseen situationfor example, a conflict of duties. For the most part, these12 Faust, Part Two.sallies into no man's land last only as long as no such conflictsoccur, and come swiftly to an end as soon as conflict is sniffed fromafar. I cannot blame the person who takes to his heels at once. Butneither can I approve his finding merit in his weakness andcowardice. Since my contempt can do him no further harm, I may aswell say that I find nothing praiseworthy about such capitulations.But if a man faced with a conflict of duties undertakes to deal withthem absolutely on his own responsibility, and before a judge whosits in judgment on him day and night, he may well find himself in anisolated position. There is now an authentic secret in his life whichcannot be discussed if only because he is involved in an endlessinner trial in which he is his own counsel and ruthless examiner, and

no secular or spiritual judge can restore his easy sleep. If he werenot already sick to death of the decisions of such judges, he wouldnever have found himself in a conflict. For such a conflict alwayspresupposes a higher sense of responsibility. It is this very qualitywhich keeps its possessor from accepting the decision of acollectivity. In his case the court is transposed to the inner worldwhere the verdict is pronounced behind closed doors.Once this happens, the psyche of the individual acquiresheightened importance. It is not only the seat of his well-known andsocially defined ego; it is also the instrument for measuring what itis worth in and for itself. Nothing so promotes the growth ofconsciousness as this inner confrontation of opposites. Quiteunsuspected facts turn up in the indictment, and the defense isobliged to discover arguments hitherto unknown. In the course ofthis, a considerable portion of the outer world reaches the inner,and by that very fact the outer world is impoverished or relieved. Onthe other hand, the inner world has gained that much weight bybeing raised to the rank of a tribunal for ethical decisions. However,the once unequivocal ego loses the prerogative of being merely theprosecutor; it must also learn the role of defendant. The egobecomes ambivalent arid ambiguous, and is caught betweenhammer and anvil. It becomes aware of a polarity superordinate toitself.By no means every conflict of duties, and perhaps not even a singleone, is ever really "solved," though it may be argued over, weighed,and counterweighed till doomsday. Sooner or later the decision issimply there, the product, it would seem, of some kind of short-circuit. Practical life cannot be suspended in an everlastingcontradiction. The opposites and the contradictions between themdo not vanish, however, even when for a moment they yield beforethe impulse to action. They constantly threaten the unity of thepersonality, and entangle life again and again in their dichotomies.

Insight into the dangers and the painfulness of such a state mightwell decide one to stay at home, that is, never to leave the safe foldand the warm cocoon, since these alone promise protection frominner stress. Those who do not have to leave father and mother arecertainly safest with them. A good many persons, however, findthemselves thrust out upon the road to individuation. In no time at allthey will become acquainted with the positive and negative aspectsof human nature.Just as all energy proceeds from opposition, so the psyche toopossesses its inner polarity, this being the indispensableprerequisite for its aliveness, as Heraclitus realized long ago. Boththeoretically and practically, polarity is inherent in all living things.Set against this overpowering force is the fragile unity of the ego,which has come into being in the course of millennia only with theaid of countless protective measures. That an ego was possible atall appears to spring from the fact that all opposites seek to achievea state of balance. This happens in the exchange of energy whichresults from the collision of hot and cold, high and low, and so on.The energy underlying conscious psychic life is pre-existent to itand therefore at first unconscious. As it approaches consciousnessit first appears projected in figures like mana, gods, daimons, etc.,whose numen seems to be the vital source of energy, and in pointof fact is so as long as these supernatural figures are accepted. Butas these fade and lose their force, the ego that is, the empiricalman seems to come into possession of this source of energy, anddoes so in the fullest meaning of this ambiguous statement: on theone hand he seeks to seize this energy, to possess it, and evenimagines that he does possess it; and on the other hand he ispossessed by it.This grotesque situation can, to be sure, occur only when thecontents of consciousness are regarded as the sole form of psychic

existence. Where this is the case, there is no preventing inflation byprojections coming home to roost. But where the existence of anunconscious psyche is admitted, the contents of projection can bereceived into the inborn instinctive forms which predateconsciousness. Their objectivity and autonomy are therebypreserved, and inflation is avoided. The archetypes, which are pre-existent to consciousness and condition it, appear in the part theyactually play in reality: as a priori structural forms of the stuff ofconsciousness. They do not in any sense represent things as theyare in themselves, but rather the forms in which things can beperceived and conceived. Naturally, it is not merely the archetypesthat govern the particular nature of perceptions. They account onlyfor the collective component of a perception. As an attribute ofinstinct they partake of its dynamic nature, and consequentlypossess a specific energy which causes or compels definitemodes of behavior or impulses; that is, they may under certaincircumstances have a possessive or obsessive force (numinosity!).The conception of them as daimonia is therefore quite in accordwith their nature.If anyone is inclined to believe that any aspect of the nature of thingsis changed by such formulations, he is being extremely credulousabout words. The real facts do not change, whatever names wegive them. Only we ourselves are affected. If one were to conceiveof "God" as "pure Nothingness," that has nothing whatsoever to dowith the fact of a superordinate principle. We are just as muchpossessed as before; the change of name has removed nothing atall from reality. At most we have taken a false attitude toward realityif the new name implies a denial. On the other hand, a positivename for the unknowable has the merit of putting us into acorrespondingly positive attitude. If, therefore, we speak of "God"as an "archetype," we are saying nothing about His real nature butare letting it be known that "God" already has a place in that part of

our psyche which is pre-existent to consciousness and that Hetherefore cannot be considered an invention of consciousness. Weneither make Him more remote nor eliminate Him, but bring Himcloser to the possibility of being experienced. This lattercircumstance is by no means unimportant, for a thing which cannotbe experienced may easily be suspected of non-existence. Thissuspicion is so inviting that so-called believers in God see nothingbut atheism in my attempt to reconstruct the primitive unconsciouspsyche. Or if not atheism, then Gnosticism anything, heaven forbid,but a psychic reality like the unconscious. If the unconscious isanything at all, it must consist of earlier evolutionary stages of ourconscious psyche. The assumption that man in his whole glory wascreated on the sixth day of Creation, without any preliminary stages,is after all somewhat too simple and archaic to satisfy usnowadays. There is pretty general agreement on that score. Inregard to the psyche, however, the archaic conception holds ontenaciously: the psyche has no antecedents, is a tabula rasa, arisesanew at birth, and is only what it imagines itself to be.Consciousness is phylogenetically and ontogenetically a secondaryphenomenon. It is time this obvious fact were grasped at last. Justas the body has an anatomical prehistory of millions of years, soalso does the psychic system. And just as the human body todayrepresents in each of its parts the result of this evolution, andeverywhere still shows traces of its earlier stages so the same maybe said of the psyche. Consciousness began its evolution from ananimal-like state which seems to us unconscious, and the sameprocess of differentiation is repeated in every child. The psyche ofthe child in its reconscious state is anything but a tabula rasa; it isalready preformed in a recognizably individual way, and ismoreover equipped with all specifically human instincts, as well aswith the a priori foundations of the higher functions.On this complicated base, the ego arises. Throughout life the ego is

sustained by this base. When the base does not function, stasisensues and then death. Its life and its reality are of vital importance.Compared to it, even the external world is secondary , for what doesthe world matter if the endogenous impulse to grasp it andmanipulate it is lacking? In the long run no conscious will can everreplace the life instinct. This instinct comes to us from within, as acompulsion or will or command, and--if as has more or less beendone from time immemorial--we give it the name of a personaldaimon we are at least aptly expressing the psychological situation.And if, by employing the concept of the archetype, we attempt todefine a little more closely the point at which the daimon grips us,we have not abolished anything, only approached closer to thesource of life.It is only natural that I as a psychiatrist (doctor of the soul) shouldespouse such a view, for I am primarily interested in how I can helpmy patients find their healthy base again. T o do that, a great varietyof knowledge is needed, as I have learned. Medicine in generalhas, after all, proceeded in like manner. It has not made itsadvances through the discovery of some single trick of healing, thusphenomenally simplifying its methods. On the contrary, it hasevolved into a science of enormous complexity not the least of thereasons being that it has made borrowings from all possible fields.Hence I am not concerned with proving anything to otherdisciplines; I am merely attempting to put their knowledge to gooduse in my own field. Naturally, it is incumbent upon me to report onsuch applications and their consequences. For certain new thingscome to light when one transfers the knowledge of one field toanother and applies it in practice. Had X-rays remained theexclusive property of the physicist and not been applied inmedicine, we would know far less. Then again, if radiation therapyhas in some circumstances dangerous consequences, that isinteresting to the physician; but it is not necessarily of interest to the

physicist, who uses radiation in an altogether different manner andfor other purposes. Nor will he think that the physician has poachedupon his territory when the latter points out certain harmful orsalutary properties of the invisible rays.If I, for example, apply historical or theological insights inpsychotherapy, they naturally appear in a different light and lead toconclusions other than those to which they lead when restricted totheir proper fields, where they serve other purposes.The fact, therefore, that a polarity underlies the dynamics of thepsyche means that the whole problem of opposites in its broadestsense, with all its concomitant religious and philosophical aspects,is drawn into the psychological discussion. These aspects lose theautonomous character they have in their own field inevitably so,since they are approached in terms of psychological questions; thatis, they are no longer viewed from the angle of religious orphilosophical truth, but are examined for their psychological validityand significance. Leaving aside their claim to be independenttruths, the fact remains that regarded empirically which is to say,scientifically they are primarily psychic phenomena. This fact seemsto me incontestable. That they claim a justification for themselves isin keeping with the psychological approach, which does not brandsuch a claim unjustified, but on the contrary treats it with specialconsideration. Psychology has no room for judgments like "onlyreligious" or "only philosophical".despite the fact that we too oftenhear the charge of something's being "only psychological"especially from theologians.All conceivable statements are made by the psyche. Among otherthings, the psyche appears as a dynamic process which rests on afoundation of antithesis, on a flow of energy between two poles. It isa general rule of logic that "principles are not to be multipliedbeyond the necessary." Therefore, since interpretation in terms of

energy has proved a generally valid principle of explanation in thenatural sciences, we must limit ourselves to it in psychology also.No firm facts are available which would recommend some otherview; moreover, the antithetical or polaristic nature of the psycheand its contents is verified by psychological experience.[13]Now if the dynamic conception of the psyche is correct, allstatements which seek to overstep the limits of the psyche's polaritystatements about a metaphysical reality, for example must beparadoxical if they are to lay claim to any sort of validity.The psyche cannot leap beyond itself. It cannot set up any absolutetruths, for its own polarity determines the relativity of its13 Cf. "On Psychic Energy," in The Structure and Dynamics of the Psyche(CW8).statements. Wherever the psyche does announce absolute truthssuch as, for example, "God is motion," or "God is One" itnecessarily falls into one or the other of its own antitheses. For thetwo statements might equally well be: "God is rest".or "God is All."Through one-sidedness the psyche disintegrates and loses itscapacity for cognition. It becomes an unreflective (becauseunreflectable) succession of psychic states, each of which fanciesitself its own justification because it does not, or does not yet, seeany other state.In saying this we are not expressing a value judgment, but onlypointing out that the limit is very frequently overstepped. Indeed, thisis inevitable, for, as Heraclitus says, "Everything is flux".Thesis isfollowed by antithesis, and between the two is generated a thirdfactor, a lysis which was not perceptible before. In this the psycheonce again merely demonstrates its antithetical nature and at nopoint has really got outside itself.

In my effort to depict the limitations of the psyche I do not mean toimply that only the psyche exists. It is merely that, so far asperception and cognition are concerned, we cannot see beyond thepsyche. Science is tacitly convinced that a non- psychic,transcendental object exists. But science also knows how difficult itis to grasp the real nature of the object, especially when the organof perception fails or is lacking, and when the appropriate modes ofthought do not exist or have still to be created. In cases whereneither our sense organs nor their artificial aids can attest thepresence of a real object, the difficulties mount enormously, so thatone feels tempted to assert that there is simply no real objectpresent. I have never drawn this overhasty conclusion, for I havenever been inclined to think that our senses were capable ofperceiving all forms of being. I have, therefore, even hazarded thepostulate that the phenomenon of archetypal configurations whichare psychic events par excellence may be founded upon a psychoidbase, that is, upon an only partially psychic and possibly altogetherdifferent form of being. For lack of empirical data I have neitherknowledge nor understanding of such forms of being, which arecommonly called spiritual. From the point of view of science, it isimmaterial what I may believe on that score, and I must accept myignorance. But insofar as the archetypes act upon me, they are realand actual to me, even though I do not know what their real natureis. This applies, of course, not only to the archetypes but to thenature of the psyche in general. Whatever it may state about itself, itwill never get beyond itself. All comprehension and all that iscomprehended is in itself psychic, and to that extent we arehopelessly cooped up in an exclusively psychic world. Nevertheless,we have good reason to suppose that behind this veil there existsthe uncomprehended absolute object which affects and influencesus and to suppose it even, or particularly, in the case of psychicphenomena about which no verifiable statements can be made.Statements concerning possibility or impossibility are valid only in

specialized fields; outside those fields they are merely arrogantpresumptions.Prohibited though it may be from an objective point of view to makestatements out of the blue that is, without sufficient reason there arenevertheless some statements which apparently have to be madewithout objective reasons. The justification here is a psychodynamicone, of the sort usually termed subjective and regarded as a purelypersonal matter. But that is to commit the mistake of failing todistinguish whether the statement really proceeds only from anisolated subject, and is prompted by exclusively personal motives,or whether it occurs generally and springs from a collectivelypresent dynamic pattern. In that case it should not be classed assubjective, but as psychologically objective, since an indefinitenumber of individuals find themselves prompted by an innerimpulse to make an identical statement, or feel a certain view to bea vital necessity. Since the archetype is not just an inactive form, buta real force charged with a specific energy, it may very well beregarded as the causa efficiens of such statements, and beunderstood as the subject of them. In other words, it is not thepersonal human being who is making the statement, but thearchetype speaking through him. If these statements are stifled ordisregarded, both medical experience and common knowledgedemonstrate that psychic troubles are in store. These will appeareither as neurotic symptoms or, in the case of persons who areincapable of neurosis, as collective delusions.Archetypal statements are based upon instinctive preconditionsand have nothing to do with reason; they are neither rationallygrounded nor can they be banished by rational arguments. Theyhave always been part of the world scene representationscollectives, as Levy-Bruhl rightly called them. Certainly the ego andits will have a great part to play in life; but what the ego wills issubject in the highest degree to the interference, in ways of which

the ego is usually unaware, of the autonomy and numinosity ofarchetypal processes. Practical consideration of these processesis the essence of religion, insofar as religion can be approachedfrom a psychological point of view.IIIAt this point the fact forces itself on my attention that beside thefield of reflection there is another equally broad if not broader areain which rational understanding and rational modes ofrepresentation find scarcely anything they are able to grasp. This isthe realm of Eros. In classical times, when such things wereproperly understood, Eros was considered a god whose divinitytranscended our human limits, and who therefore could neither becomprehended nor represented in any way. I might, as many beforeme have attempted to do, venture an approach to this daimon,whose range of activity extends from the endless spaces of theheavens to the dark abysses of hell; but I falter before the task offinding the language which might adequately express theincalculable paradoxes of love, Eros is a kosmogonos, a creatorand father-mother of all higher consciousness. I sometimes feel thatPaul's words 'Though I speak with the tongues of men and ofangels, and have not love" might well be the first condition of allcognition and the quintessence of divinity itself . Whatever thelearned interpretation may be of the sentence "God is love," thewords affirm the complexio oppositorum of the Godhead. In mymedical experience as well as in my own life I have again and againbeen faced with the mystery of love, and have never been able toexplain what it is. Like Job, I had to 'lay my hand on my mouth. Ihave spoken once, and I will not answer" (Job 40:4 f .)

Here is the greatest and smallest, the remotest and nearest, thehighest and lowest, and we cannot discuss one side of it withoutalso discussing the other. No language is adequate to this paradox.Whatever one can say, no words express the whole. T o speak ofpartial aspects is always too much or too little, for only the whole ismeaningful Love "bears all things" and "endures all things" (i Cor.13:7). These words say all there is to be said; nothing can beadded to them. For we are in the deepest sense the victims and theinstruments of cosmogonic "love." I put the word in quotation marksto indicate that I do not use it in its connotations of desiring,preferring, favoring, wishing, and similar feelings, but as somethingsuperior to the individual, a unified and undivided whole. Being apart, man cannot grasp the whole. He is at its mercy. He mayassent to it, or rebel against it; but he is always caught up by it andenclosed within it. He is dependent upon it and is sustained by it.Love is his light and his darkness, whose end he cannot see. "Loveceases not" whether he speaks with the "tongues of angels," or withscientific exactitude traces the life of the cell down to its uttermostsource. Man can try to name love, showering upon it all the namesat his command, and still he will involve himself in endless self-deceptions. If he possesses a grain of wisdom, he will lay down hisarms and name the unknown by the more unknown, ignotum perignotius that is, by the name of God. That is a confession of hissubjection, his imperfection, and his dependence; but at the sametime a testimony to his freedom to choose between truth and error.

RetrospectWHEN PEOPLE SAY I am wise, or a sage, I cannot accept it. Aman once dipped a hatful of water from a stream. What did thatamount to? I am not that stream. I am at the stream, but I do nothing.Other people are at the same stream, but most of them find theyhave to do something with it. I do nothing. I never think that I am theone who must see to it that cherries grow on stalks. I stand andbehold, admiring what nature can do.There is a fine old story about a student who came to a rabbi andsaid, "In the olden days there were men who saw the face of God.Why don't they any more?" The rabbi replied, "Because nowadaysno one can stoop so low"One must stoop a little in order to fetch water from the stream.The difference between most people and myself is that for me the"dividing walls" are transparent. That is my peculiarity . Others findthese walls so opaque that they see nothing behind them andtherefore think nothing is there. T o some extent I perceive theprocesses going on in the background, and that gives me an innercertainty. People who see nothing have no certainties and can drawno conclusions or do not trust them even if they do. I do not knowwhat started me off perceiving the stream of life. Probably theunconscious itself. Or perhaps my early dreams. They determinedmy course from the beginning.Knowledge of processes in the background early shaped myrelationship to the world. Basically, that relationship was the samein my childhood as it is to this day . As a child I felt myself to bealone, and I am still, because I know things and must hint at things

which others apparently know nothing of, and for the most part donot want to know. Loneliness does not come from having no peopleabout one, but from being unable to communicate the things thatseem important to oneself, or from holding certain views whichothers find inadmissible. The loneliness began with the experiencesof my early dreams, and reached its climax at the time I wasworking on the unconscious. If a man knows more than others, hebecomes lonely. But loneliness is not necessarily inimical tocompanionship, for no one is more sensitive to companionship thanthe lonely man, and companionship thrives only when eachindividual remembers his individuality and does not identify himselfwith others.It is important to have a secret, a premonition of things unknown. Itfills life with something impersonal, a numinosum. A man who hasnever experienced that has missed something important. He mustsense that he lives in a world which in some respects is mysterious;that things happen and can be experienced which remaininexplicable; that not everything which happens can be anticipated.The unexpected and the incredible belong in this world. Only then islife whole. For me the world has from the beginning been infiniteand ungraspable.I have had much trouble getting along with my ideas. There was adaimon in me, and in the end its presence proved decisive. Itoverpowered me, and if I was at times ruthless it was because Iwas in the grip of the daimon. I could never stop at anything onceattained. I had to hasten on, to catch up with my vision. Since mycontemporaries, understandably, could not perceive my vision, theysaw only a fool rushing ahead.I have offended many people, for as soon as I saw that they did notunderstand me, that was the end of the matter so far as I wasconcerned. I had to move on. I had no patience with people aside

from my patients. I had to obey an inner law which was imposed onme and left me no freedom of choice. Of course I did not alwaysobey it. How can anyone live without inconsistency?For some people I was continually present and close to them solong as they were related to my inner world; but then it might happenthat I was no longer with them, because there was nothing left whichwould link me to them. I had to learn painfully that people continuedto exist even when they had nothing more to say to me. Manyexcited in me a feeling of living humanity, but only when theyappeared within the magic circle of psychology; next moment, whenthe spotlight cast its beam elsewhere, there was nothing to beseen. I was able to become intensely interested in many people; butas soon as I had seen through them, the magic was gone. In thisway I made many enemies. A creative person has little power overhis own life. He is not free. He is captive and driven by his daimon."Shamefully A power wrests away the heart from us, For the Heavenly Ones each demand sacrifice; But if it should be withheld Never has that led to good? says Holderlin.This lack of freedom has been a great sorrow to me. Often I felt as ifI were on a battlefield, saying, "Now you have fallen, my goodcomrade, but I must go on." For "shamefully a power wrests awaythe heart from us." I am fond of you, indeed I love you, but I cannotstay. There is something heart-rending about that. And I myself amthe victim; I cannot stay. But the daimon manages things so that onecomes through, and blessed inconsistency sees to it that in flagrantcontrast to my "disloyalty" I can keep faith in unsuspected measure.Perhaps I might say: I need people to a higher degree than others,

and at the same time much less. When the daimon is at work, oneis always too close and too far. Only when it is silent can oneachieve moderation.The daimon of creativity has ruthlessly had its way with me. Theordinary undertakings I planned usually had the worst of it thoughnot always and not everywhere. By way of compensation, I think, Iam conservative to the bone. I fill my pipe from my grandfather'stobacco jar and still keep his alpenstock, topped with a chamoishorn, which he brought back from Pontresina after having been oneof the first guests at that newly opened Kurort.I am satisfied with the course my life has taken. It has beenbountiful, and has given me a great deal. How could I ever haveexpected so much? Nothing but unexpected things kept happeningto me. Much might have been different if I myself had been different.But it was as it had to be; for all came about because I am as I am.Many things worked out as I planned them to, but that did not alwaysprove of benefit to me. But almost everything developed naturallyand by destiny. I regret many follies which sprang from myobstinacy; but without that trait I would not have reached my goal.And so I am disappointed and not disappointed. I am disappointedwith people and disappointed with myself. I have learned amazingthings from people, and have accomplished more than I expectedof myself. I cannot form any final judgment because thephenomenon of life and the phenomenon of man are too vast. Theolder I have become, the less I have understood or had insight intoor known about myself.I am astonished, disappointed, pleased with myself. I amdistressed, depressed, rapturous. I am all these things at once, andcannot add up the sum. I am incapable of determining ultimateworth or worthlessness; I have no judgment about myself and mylife. There is nothing I am quite sure about. I have no definite

convictions not about anything, really. I know only that I was bornand exist, and it seems to me that I have been carried along. I existon the foundation of something I do not know. In spite of alluncertainties, I feel a solidity underlying all existence and acontinuity in my mode of being.The world into which we are born is brutal and cruel, and at thesame time of divine beauty. Which element we think outweighs theother, whether meaninglessness or meaning, is a matter oftemperament. If meaninglessness were absolutely preponderant,the meaningfulness of life would vanish to an increasing degreewith each step in our development. But that is or seems to me notthe case. Probably, as in all metaphysical questions, both are true:Life is or has meaning and meaninglessness. I cherish the anxioushope that meaning will preponderate and win the battle.When Lao-tzu says: "All are clear, I alone am clouded," he isexpressing what I now feel in advanced old age. Lao-tzu is theexample of a man with superior insight who has seen andexperienced worth and worthlessness, and who at the end of his lifedesires to return into his own being, into the eternal unknowablemeaning. The archetype of the old man who has seen enough iseternally true. At every level of intelligence this type appears, and itslineaments are always the same, whether it be an old peasant or agreat philosopher like Lao-tzu. This is old age, and a limitation. Y etthere is so much that fills me: plants, animals, clouds, day and night,and the eternal in man. The more uncertain I have felt about myself,the more there has grown up in me a feeling of kinship with allthings. In fact it seems to me as if that alienation which so longseparated me from the world has become transferred into my owninner world, and has revealed to me an unexpected unfamiliaritywith myself.

Appendix ILETTERS FROM FREUD TO JUNG [1]Vienna IX, Berggasse 19 April 16, 1909DEAR FRIEND,... It is remarkable that on the same evening that I formally adoptedyou as an eldest son, anointing you as my successor and crownprince in partibus infidelium that then and there you should havedivested me of my paternal dignity, and that the divesting seems tohave given you as much pleasure as investing your person gaveme. Now I am afraid that I must fall back again into the role of fathertoward you in giving you my views on poltergeist phenomena. I mustdo this because these things are different from what you would liketo think.I do not deny that your comments and your experiment made apowerful impression upon me. After your departure I determined tomake some observations, and here are the results. In my front roomthere are continual creaking noises, from where the two heavyEgyptian steles rest on the oak boards of the bookcase, so that'sobvious. In the second room, where we heard the crash, suchnoises are very rare. At first I was inclined to ascribe somemeaning to it if the noise we heard so frequently when you werehere were never heard again after your departure. But since then ithas happened over and over again, yet never in connection with mythoughts and never when I was considering you or your specialproblem. (Not now, either, I add by way of challenge.) Thephenomenon was soon deprived of all significance for me by

something else. My credulity, or at least my readiness to believe,vanished along with the spell of your personal presence; onceagain, for various inner reasons, it seems to me wholly1 Reproduced with the land permission of Ernst Freud, London.implausible that anything of the sort should occur. The furniturestands before me spiritless and dead, like nature silent andgodless before the poet after the passing of the gods of Greece.I therefore don once more my horn-rimmed paternal spectacles andwarn my dear son to keep a cool head and rather not understandsomething than make such great sacrifices for the sake ofunderstanding. I also shake my wise gray locks over the question ofpsycho-synthesis and think: Well, that is how the young folks are;they really enjoy things only when they need not drag us along withthem, where with our short breath and weary legs we cannot follow.Now I shall exercise the privilege of my years to turn loquacious andtell you about one more matter between heaven and earth whichcannot be understood. A few years ago I took it into my head that Iwould die between the ages of 61 and 62, which at that timeseemed to leave me a decent period of grace. (T oday that leavesme only eight years still to go.) Shortly afterward I made a trip toGreece with my brother, and it was absolutely uncanny to see howthe number 61, or 60 in conjunction with i and a, kept cropping upon anything that had a number, especially on vehicles. Iconscientiously noted down these occasions. By the time we cameto Athens, I was feeling depressed. At our hotel we were assignedrooms on the second floor, and I hoped I could breathe again atleast there could be no chance of No. 61. However, it turned out thatmy room was No. 31 (which, with fatalistic license, I regarded asafter all half of 61-62). This wilier and nimbler figure proved to beeven better at dogging me than the first.

From that day until very recently the number 31 remained faithful tome, with a 2 all too readily associated with it. But since I also havein my psychic system regions in which I am merely avid forknowledge and not at all superstitious, I have attempted to analyzethis conviction. Here it is. My conviction began in 1899. Two eventscoincided at that time. The first was my writing The Interpretation ofDreams (which, you know, is dated ahead to 1900); the second, mybeing assigned a new telephone number, which I have to this day:14362. It is easy to establish the link between these two facts: in theyear 1899, when I wrote The Interpretation of Dreams, I was 43years old. What should be more obvious than that the other figuresin my telephone number were intended to signify the end of my life,hence, 61 or 62? Suddenly there appears a method in thismadness. The superstition that I would die between 61 and 62 turnsout to be equivalent to the conviction that with the book on dreams Ihad completed my life work, needed to say no more, and could diein peace. Y ou will grant that after this analysis it no longer soundsso non-sensical. Incidentally, the influence of Wilhelm Fliess plays apart in this; the superstitition dates from the year of his attack onme.Here is another instance where you will find confirmation of thespecifically Jewish character of my mysticism. Apart from this, I onlywant to say that adventures such as mine with the number 62 canbe explained by two things. The first is an enormously intensifiedalertness on the part of the unconscious, so that one is led likeFaust to see a Helen in every woman. The second is the undeniable"co-operation of chance," which plays the same role in theformation of delusions as somatic co-operation in hystericalsymptoms or linguistic co-operation in puns.I therefore look forward to hearing more about your investigations ofthe spook-complex, my interest being the interest one has in a

lovely delusion which one does not share oneself.With cordial regards to yourself, your wife and children, Yours,Freud.Vienna IX, Berggasse 19May 1DEAR FRIEND,... I know that your deepest inclinations are impelling you toward astudy of the occult, and do not doubt that you will return home with arich cargo. There is no stopping that, and it is always right for aperson to follow the biddings of his own impulses. The reputationyou have won with your Dementia [2] will stand against the chargeof "mystic" for quite a while. Only don't stay too long away from us inthose lush tropical colonies; it is necessary to govern at home....With cordial greetings and the hope that you will write me againafter a shorter interval this time.Your faithfulFreud.2. See above, Chap. V, n. 4, p. 149.Vienna IX, Berggasse 19June 15, 1911DEAR FRIEND,

... In matters of occultism I have become humble ever since thegreat lesson I received from Ferenczi's experiences. [3] I promiseto believe everything that can be made to seem the least bitreasonable. As you know, I do not do so gladly. But my hubris hasbeen shattered. I should like to have you and F. acting inconsonance when one of you is ready to take the perilous step ofpublication, and I imagine that this would be quite compatible withcomplete independence during the progress of the work....Cordial regards to you and the beautiful housefrom Your faithfulFreud3. Cf. Ernest Jones, Life and Work of Sigmund Freud (New York, 1953-57),III, pp. 387 f.

Appendix IILETTERS TO EMMA JUNG FROM AMERICA(1909)September 6, 1909, MondayAt Prof. Stanley HaltsClark University, Worcester.... So now we are safely arrived in Worcester! I have to tell youabout the trip. Last Saturday there was dreary weather in New Y ork.All three of us were afflicted with diarrhea and had pretty badstomach aches.... In spite of feeling physically miserable and inspite of not eating anything, I went to the paleontological collection,where all the old monsters, the Lord God's anxiety dreams ofCreation, are to be seen. The collection is absolutely unique for thephylogenesis of T ertiary mammals. I cannot possibly tell you all Isaw there. Then I met Jones, who had just arrived from Europe.Around half-past three we took the elevated and rode from 42ndStreet to the piers. There we boarded a fantastically huge structureof a steamer that had some five white decks. We took cabins, andour vessel set sail from the West River around the point ofManhattan with all its tremendous skyscrapers, then up the EastRiver under the Brooklyn and Manhattan Bridges, right through theendless tangle of tugs, ferryboats, etc., and through the Soundbehind Long Island. It was damp and chilly, we had belly aches anddiarrhea and were suffering from hunger besides, so we crawledinto bed. Early on Sunday morning we were already on land in FallRiver City, where in the rain we took the train to Boston andimmediately went on to Worcester. While we were en route, the

weather cleared. The countryside was utterly charming, low hills, agreat deal of forest, swamp, small lakes, innumerable huge erraticrocks, tiny villages with wooden houses, painted red, green, or gray,with windows framed in white (Holland!), tucked away under large,beautiful trees. By 11:30 we were in Worcester. We found theStandish Hotel a very pleasant place to stay , and cheap also, "onthe American plan," as they say here that is, with board. At six in theevening, after a well-deserved rest, we called on Stanley Hall. He isa refined, distinguished old gentleman close on seventy whoreceived us with the kindest hospitality. He has a plump, jolly, good-natured, and extremely ugly wife who, however, serves wonderfulfood. She promptly took over Freud and me as her "boys" and pliedus with delicious nourishment and noble wine, so that we beganvisibly to recover. We slept very well that night in the hotel, and thismorning we have moved over to the Halls'. The house is furnished inan incredibly amusing fashion, everything roomy and comfortable.There is a splendid studio filled with thousands of books, and boxesof cigars everywhere. Two pitch-black Negroes in dinner jackets,the extreme of grotesque solemnity, perform as servants. Carpetseverywhere, all the doors open, even the bathroom door and thefront door; people going in and out all over the place; all thewindows extend down to the floor. The house is surrounded by anEnglish lawn, no garden fence. Half the city (about a hundred andeighty thousand inhabitants) stands in a regular forest of old treeswhich shade all the streets. Most of the houses are smaller thanours, charmingly surrounded by flowers and flowering shrubs,overgrown with Virginia creeper and wisteria; everything welltended, clean, cultivated, and exceedingly peaceful and congenial.A wholly different America! This is what they call New England. Thecity was founded as long ago as 1690, so it is very old. Muchprosperity. The university, richly endowed, is small butdistinguished, and has a real, though plain, elegance. This morningwas the opening session. Prof. X had first turn, with boring stuff. We

soon decamped and took a delightful walk through the outskirts ofthe town, which is surrounded on all sides by small and minutelakes and cool woods. We were ecstatic over the peaceful beautyof the surroundings. It is refreshing and reviving after the life in NewYork....Clark UniversityWorcester, MassachusettsWednesday, September 8, 1909... The people here are all exceedingly amiable and on a decentcultural level. We are beautifully taken care of at the Halls' and dailyrecovering from the exertions of New Y ork. My stomach is almostback to normal now; from time to time there is a little twitch, butaside from that, my general health is excellent. Y esterday Freudbegan the lectures and received great applause. We are gainingground here, and our following is growing slowly but surely. T oday Ihad a talk about psychoanalysis with two highly cultivated elderlyladies who proved to be very well informed and free-thinking. I wasgreatly surprised, since I had prepared myself for opposition.Recently we had a large garden party with fifty people present, inthe course of which I surrounded myself with five ladies. I was evenable to make jokes in English though what English! T omorrowcomes my first lecture; all my dread of it has vanished, since theaudience is harmless and merely eager to hear new things, which iscertainly what we can supply them with. It is said that we shall beawarded honorary doctorates by the university next Saturday, with agreat deal of pomp and circumstance. In the evening there will be a"formal reception." T oday's letter has to be short, since the Hallshave invited some people for five o'clock to meet us. We have alsobeen interviewed by the Boston Evening Transcript. In fact we arethe men of the hour here. It is very good to be able to spread

oneself in this way once in a while. I can feel that my libido isgulping it in with vast enjoyment...Clark UniversityWorcester ', Mass.September 24, 1909... Last night there was a tremendous amount of ceremony andfancy dress, with all sorts of red and black gowns and gold-tasseledsquare caps. In a grand and festive assemblage I was appointedDoctor of Laws honoris causa and Freud likewise. Now I may placean L.L.D. after my name. Impressive, what?... T oday Prof. M. droveus by automobile out to lunch at a beautiful lake. The landscapewas utterly lovely. This evening there is one more "privateconference" in Hall's house on the "psychology of sex." Our time isdreadfully crammed. The Americans are really masters at that; theyhardly leave one time to catch one's breath. Right now I am ratherworn out from all the fabulous things we have been through, and amlonging for the quiet of the mountains. My head is spinning. Lastnight at the awarding of the doctorate I had to deliver an impromptutalk before some three hundred persons.... Freud is in seventhheaven, and I am glad with all my heart to see him so....I am looking forward enormously to getting back to the sea again,where the overstimulated psyche can recover in the presence ofthat infinite peace and spaciousness. Here one is in an almostconstant whirlwind. But I have, thank God, completely regained mycapacity for enjoyment, so that I can look forward to everything withzest. Now I am going to take everything that comes along by storm,and then I shall settle down again, satiated...Albany, N. Y.

September 18,... Two more days before departure! Everything is taking place in awhirl. Yesterday I stood upon a bare rocky peak nearly 5600 feethigh, in the midst of tremendous virgin forests, looking far out intothe blue infinities of America and shivering to the bone in the icywind, and today I am in the midst of the metropolitan bustle ofAlbany , the capital of the State of New Y ork! The hundred thousandenormously deep impressions I am taking back with me from thiswonderland cannot be described with the pen. Everything is too big,too immeasurable. Something that has gradually been dawningupon me in the past few days is the recognition that here an idealpo- tentiality of life has become reality. Men are as well off here asthe culture permits; women badly off. We have seen things here thatin- spire enthusiastic admiration, and things that make one pondersocial  evolution deeply. As far as technological culture isconcerned, we lag miles behind Ajnerica. But all that is frightfullycostly and already carries the germ of the end in itself. I must tell youa great, great deal. I shall never forget the experiences of thisjourney. Now we are tired of America. Tomorrow morning we are offto New York, and on September 21 we sail!...368Appendix IISteamer Kaiser Wilhelm der Grosse North German LloydBREMENSeptember 22, 1909... Y esterday morning I shook the dust o America from my feet, with

a light heart and an aching head, for the Y/s plied us with won- derfulchampagne.... As far as abstinence goes, I've arrived on very shakyground indeed, in point of principle, so that I am honorablywithdrawing from my various teetotal societies. I confess myself anhonest sinner and only hope that I can endure the sight of a glass ofwine without emotion an undrunk glass, of course. That is alwaysso; only the forbidden attracts. I think I must not forbid myself toomuch....Well, then, at ten o'clock yesterday morning we sailed, to our left thetowering whitish and reddish heaven-storming towers of New YorkCity , to our right the smoking chimneys, docks, etc., of Hoboken.The morning was misty; New York soon disappeared, and beforelong the big swells of the ocean began. At the fireship we droppedthe American pilot and then sailed on out "into the mournful waste-land of the sea." It is, as always, of cosmic grandeur and simplicity,compelling silence; for what has man to say here, especially at nightwhen the ocean is alone with the starry sky? One looks out silendy,surrendering all self-importance, and many old sayings and imagesscurry through the mind; a low voice says something about the age-oldness and infinitude of the "far-swelling, murmurous sea," of "thewaves of the sea and of love," of Leukothea, the lovely goddesswho appears in the foam of the seething waves to travel-wearyOdysseus and gives him the pearly veil which saves him fromPoseidon's storm. The sea is like music; it has all the dreams of thesoul within itself and sounds them over. The beauty and grandeur ofthe sea consists in our being forced down into the fruitfulbottomlands of our own psyches, where we confront and re-createourselves in the animation of the "mournful wasteland of the sea."Now we are still worn out from the "torment of these last days." Webrood over the past few months, and the unconscious has a lot ofwork to do, putting in order all the things America has churned upwithin us. ...

Steamer Kaiser Wilhelm der GrosseNorth German LloydBREMENSeptember 25, 1909.... Y esterday there was a storm that lasted all day until nearlymidnight. Most of the day I stood up front, under the bridge, on aprotected and elevated spot, and admired the magnificentspectacle as the mountainous waves rolled up and poured awhirling cloud of foam over the ship. The ship began to roll fearfully,and several times we were soaked by a salty shower. It turned cold,and we went in for a cup of tea. Inside, however, the t>rain floweddown the spinal canal and tried to come out again from under thestomach. Conse- quently I retired to my bed, where I soon felt fineagain and later was able to consume a pleasant supper. Outsidefrom time to time a wave thundered against the ship. The objects inmy cabin had all come to life: the sofa cushion crawled about on thefloor in the semi- darkness; a recumbent shoe sat up, lookedaround in astonishment, and then shuffled quietly off under the sofa;a standing shoe turned wearily on its side and followed its mate.Now the scene changed. I realized that the shoes had gone underthe sofa to fetch my bag and brief case. The whole companyparaded over to join the big trunk under the bed. One sleeve of myshirt on the sofa waved longingly after them, and from inside thechests and drawers came rumbles and rattles. Suddenly there wasa terrible crash under my floor, a rattling, clattering, and tinkling.One of the kitchens is underneath me. There, at one blow, fivehundred plates had been awakened from their deathlike torpor andwith a single bold leap had put a sudden end to their drearyexistence as slaves. In all the cabins round about, unspeakablegroans betrayed the secrets of the menu. I slept like a top, and this

morning the wind is beginning to blow from another side....

Appendix IIILETTER TO EMMA JUNGFROM NORTH AFRICA(1920)Grand Hotel SousseSousse Monday, March 15, 1920This Africa is incredible... Unfortunately I cannot write coherently to you, for it is all too much.Only sidelights. After cold, heavy weather at sea, a sparklingmorning in Algiers. Bright houses and streets, dark green clumps oftrees, tall palms' crowns rising among them. White burnooses, redfezzes, and among these the yellow uniforms of the Tirailleursd'Afrique, the red of the Spahis, then the Botanical Gardens, an en-chanted tropical forest, an Indian vision, holy acvatta trees withgigantic aerial roots like monsters, fantastic dwellings of the gods,enormous in extent, heavy, dark green foliage rustling in the seawind.Then thirty hours by rail to Tunis. The Arab city is classical antiquityand Moorish middle ages, Granada and the fairy tale of Baghdad.Yo u no  lo ng e r  t hi nk  o f  yo ur s e lf ;  yo u a r e  d i s s o lve d  i n t hi s  potpourriwhich cannot be evaluated, still less described: a Roman columnstands here as part of a wall; an old Jewess of unspeakableugliness goes by in white baggy breeches; a crier with a load ofburnooses pushes through the crowd, shouting in gutturals thatmight have come straight from the canton of Zurich; a patch of deep

blue sky, a snow-white mosque dome; a shoemaker busily stitchingaway at shoes in a small vaulted niche, with a hot, dazzling patch ofsunlight on the mat before him; blind musicians with a (hum and tinythree-stringed lute; a beggar who consists of nothing but rags;smoke from oil cakes, and swarms of flies; up above, on a whiteminaret in the blissful ether, a muezzin sings the midday chant; be-low, a cool, shady, colonnaded yard with horseshoe portal framedin glazed tiles; on die wall a mangy cat lies in the sun;ia coming andgoing of red, white, yellow, blue, brown mantles, white turbans, redfezzes, uniforms, faces ranging from white and light yellow to deepblack; a shuffling of yellow and red slippers, a noiseless scurrying ofnaked black feet, and so on and so on.In the morning the great god rises and fills both horizons with his joyand power, and all living things obey him. At night the moon is sosilvery and glows with such divine clarity that no one can doubt theexistence of Astarte.Between Algiers and Tunis He 550 miles of African soil, toweringup to the noble and spreading shapes of the great Atlas range,wide valleys and plateaus bursting with grapes and grain, darkgreen forests of cork oak. T oday Horus rose out of distant, palemountains over an unending green and brown plain, and from tiedesert there sprang up a mighty wind which blew out to the darkblue sea. On rolling, gray-green hills yellow-brown remains of wholeRoman cities, small flocks of black goats grazing around them,nearby a Bedouin camp with black tents, camels, and donkeys. Thetrain runs into a camel which cannot make up its mind to get off thetracks; the beast is killed; there is a great running up, shrieking, andgesticulating of white-clad figures; and always the sea, now deepblue, now hurting the eyes with its glitter in the sunlight. Out of olivegroves and palms and hedges of giant cactus floating in theflickering, sun-shot air rises a snow-white city with divinely whitedomes and towers, gloriously spread out over a hill. Then comes

Sousse, with white walls and towers, the harbor below; beyond theharbor wall the deep blue sea, and in the port lies the sailing shipwith two lateen sails which I once painted!!!!Yo u s t um b le  o ve r  Ro m a n r e m a i ns ;  wi t h m y c a ne  I d ug  a  p i e c e  o fRoman pottery out of the ground.This is all nothing but miserable stammering; I do not know whatAfrica is really saying to me, but it speaks. Imagine a tremendoussun, air clear as in the highest mountains, a sea bluer than any youhave ever seen, all colors of incredible power. In the markets youcan  still buy the amphorae of antiquity things like that and themoon!!!...

Appendix IVRICHARD WILHELMI first met Richard Wilhelm at Count Keyserling's during a meet- ingof the "School of Wisdom" in Darmstadt That was in the earlytwenties. In 1923 we invited him to Zurich and he spoke on the IChing I at the Psychology Club.Even before meeting him I had been interested in Oriental philoso-phy, and around 1920 had begun experimenting with the I Ching.One summer in Bollingen I resolved to make an all-out attack on theriddle of this book. Instead of traditional stalks of yarrow required bythe classical method, I cut myself a bunch of reeds. I would sit forhours on the ground beneath the hundred-year-old pear tree, the IChing beside me, practicing the technique by referring the result-ant oracles to one another in an interplay of questions and answers.All sorts of undeniably remarkable results emerged meaningful con-nections with my own thought processes which I could not explain tomyself.The only subjective intervention in this experiment consists in theexperimenter's arbitrarily that is, without counting dividing up thebundle of forty-nine stalks at a single swoop. He does not know howmany stalks are contained in each bundle, and yet the resultdepends upon their numerical relationship. All other manipulationsproceed mechanically and leave no room for interference by thewill. If a psychic causal connection is present at all, it can onlyconsist in the chance division of the bundle (or, in the other method,the chance fall of the coins).During the whole of those summer holidays I was preoccupied with

the question: Are the I Chings answers meaningful or not? If1 The I Ching, or Book of Changes: English trans, by Cary F. Baynes, fromthe German version of R. Wilhelm (New York and London, 1950). The originsof this ancient Chinese book of wisdom and oracles go back to the fourthmillennium B.C. they are, how does the connection between the psychicand the physical sequence of events come about? Time and again I en-countered amazing coincidences which seemed to suggest the idea of anacausal parallelism (a synchronicity, as I later called it). So fascinated was Iby these experiments that I altogether forgot to take notes, which I afterwardgreatly regretted. Later, however, when I often used to carry out theexperiment with my patients, it became quite clear that a significant numberof answers did indeed hit the mark. I remember, for example, the case of ayoung man with a strong mother complex. He wanted to marry, and hadmade the ac- quaintance of a seemingly suitable girl. However, he feltuncertain, fearing that under the influence of his complex he might oncemore find himself in the power of an overwhelming mother. I conducted theexperiment with him. The text of his hexagram read: "The maiden ispowerful. One should not marry such a maiden".In the mid-thirties I met the Chinese philosopher Hu Shih. I askedhim his opinion of the I Ching, and received the reply: "Oh, that'snothing but an old collection of magic spells, without signifi- cance"He had had no experience with it or so he said. Only once, heremembered, had he come across it in practice. One day on a walkwith a friend, the friend had told him about his unhappy love affair.They were just passing by a Taoist temple. As a joke, he had saidto his friend: "Here you can consult the oracle!" No sooner said thandone. They went into the temple together and asked the priest foran I Ching oracle. But he had not the slightest faith in this nonsense.I asked him whether the oracle had been correct. Whereupon hereplied reluctantly, "Oh yes, it was, of course . . ".Remembering thewell-known story of the "good friend" who does everything one doesnot wish to do oneself, I cautiously asked him whether he had notprofited by this opportunity. "Y es," he replied, "as a joke I asked a

question too.""And did the oracle give you a sensible answer?" I asked.He hesitated. "Oh well, yes, if you wish to put it that way".Thesubject obviously made him uncomfortable.A few years after my first experiments with the reeds, the I Chingwas published with Wilhelm's commentary. I instantly obtained thebook, and found to my gratification that Wilhelm took much thesame view of the meaningful connections as I had. But he knew theentire literature and could therefore fill in the gaps which had beenoutside my competence. When Wilhelm came to Zurich, I had theopportunity to discuss the matter with him at length, and we talked agreat deal about Chinese philosophy and religion. What he told me,out of his wealth of knowledge of the Chinese mentality, clarifiedsome of the most difficult problems that the European unconscioushad posed for me. On the other hand, what I had to tell him aboutthe results of my investigations of the unconscious caused him nolittle surprise; for he recognized in them things he had considered tobe the exclusive possession of the Chinese philosophical tradition.As a young man Wilhelm had gone to China in the service of aChristian mission, and there the mental world of the Orient hadopened its doors wide to him. Wilhelm was a truly religious spirit,with an unclouded and farsighted view of things. He had the gift ofbeing able to listen without bias to the revelations of a foreignmentality, and to accomplish that miracle of empathy which enabledhim to make the intellectual treasures of China accessible toEurope. He was deeply influenced by Chinese culture, and oncesaid to me, "It is a great satisfaction to me that I never baptized asingle Chi- nese!" In spite of his Christian background, he could nothelp recog- nizing the logic and clarity of Chinese thought."Influenced" is sot quite the word to describe its effect upon him; it

had overwhelmed and assimilated him. His Christian viewsreceded into the back- ground, but did not vanish entirely; theyformed a kind of mental reservation, a moral proviso that was laterto have fateful conse- quences.In China he had the good fortune to meet a sage of the old schoolwhom the revolution had driven out of the interior. This sage, LauNai Suan, introduced him to Chinese yoga philosophy and the psy-chology of the I Ching. T o the collaboration of these two men weowe the edition of the I Ching with its excellent commentary. For thefirst time this prof oundest work of the Orient was introduced to theWest in a living and comprehensible fashion. I consider thispublica- tion Wilhelm's most important work. Clear andunmistakably Western as his mentality was, in his I Chingcommentary he manifested a de- gree of adaptation to Chinesepsychology which is altogether un- matched.When the last page of the translation was finished and the firstprinter's proofs were coming in, the old master Lau Nai Suan died.It was as if his work were completed and he had delivered the lastmessage of the old, dying China to Europe. And Wilhelm had beenthe perfect disciple, a fulfillment of the wish-dream of the sage.Wilhelm, when I met him, seemed completely Chinese, in outwardmanner as much as in his way of writing and speaking. The Orientalpoint of view and ancient Chinese culture had penetrated himthrough and through. Upon his arrival in Europe, he entered thefaculty of the China Institute in Frankfurt am Main. Both in histeaching work and in his lectures to laymen, however, he seemed tofeel the pressure of the European spirit. Christian views and formsof thought moved steadily into the foreground. I went to hear somelectures of his and they turned out to be scarcely any different fromconventional sermons.

This reversion to the past seemed to me somewhat unreflective andtherefore dangerous. I saw it as a reassimilation to the West, andfelt that as a result of it Wilhelm must come into conflict with him-self. Since it was, so I thought, a passive assimilation, that is to say,a succumbing to the influence of the environment, there was thedanger of a relatively unconscious conflict, a clash between hisWestern and Eastern psyche. If, as I assumed, the Christian attitudehad originally given way to the influence of China, the reverse mightwell be tak- ing place now: the European element might be gainingthe upper hand over the Orient once again. If such a process takesplace with- out a strong, conscious attempt to come to terms with it,the un- conscious conflict can seriously affect the physical state ofhealth.After attending the lectures, I attempted to call his attention to thedanger threatening him. My words to him were: "My dear Wilhelm,please do not take this amiss, but I have the feeling that the West istaking possession of you again, and that you are becomingunfaithful to your mission of transmitting the East to the West".He replied, "I think you are right something here is overpoweringme. But what can be done?"A few years later Wilhelm was staying as a guest in my house, andcame down with an attack of amoebic dysentery. It was a diseasehe had had twenty years before. His condition grew worse duringthe following months, and then I heard that Wilhelm was in thehospital. I went to Frankfurt to visit him, and found a very sick man.The doctors had not yet given up hope, and Wilhelm, too, spoke ofplans he wished to carry out when he got well. I shared his hopes,but had my forebodings. What he confided to me at the timeconfirmed my conjectures. In his dreams, he revisited the endlessstretches of deso- late Asiatic steppes the China he had leftbehind. He was groping his way back to the problem which China

had set before him, the answer to which had been blocked for himby the West. By now he was conscious of this question, but hadbeen unable to find a solution. His illness dragged on for months.A few weeks before his death, when I had had no news from him fora considerable time, I was awakened, just as I was on the point offalling asleep, by a vision. At my bed stood a Chinese in a darkblue gown, hands crossed in the sleeves. He bowed low before me,as if he wished to give me a message. I knew what it signified. Thevision was extraordinarily vivid. Not only did I see every wrinkle inthe man's face, but every thread in the fabric of his gown.Wilhelm's problem might also be regarded as a conflict betweenconsciousness and the unconscious, which in his case took theform of a clash between West and East. I believed I understood hissituation, since I myself had the same problem as he and knewwhat it meant to be involved in this conflict. It is true that even at ourlast meeting Wilhelm did not speak plainly. Though he was intenselyinterested when I introduced the psychological point of view, hisinterest lasted only so long as my remarks concerned objectivematters such as meditation or questions posed by the psychologyof religion. So far, so good. But whenever I attempted to touch theactual problem of his inner conflict, I immediately sensed a drawingback, an in- ward shutting himself off because such matters wentstraight to the bone. This is a phenomenon I have observed in manymen of im- portance. There is, as Goethe puts it in Faust, an"untrodden, un- treadable" region whose precincts cannot andshould not be entered by force; a destiny which will brook no humanintervention.

Appendix VSeptem Sermones ad Mortuos(1916)Jung allowed Septem Sermones ad Mortuos (Seven Sermons tothe Dead) to be published privately as a booklet. He occasionallygave copies to friends; it was never obtainable at bookstores. Laterhe described it as a sin of his youth and regretted it.The language is more or less in the style of the Red Book. Butcompared with the endless conversations with inner figures in theRed Book, the Seven Sermons form a self-contained whole. Theyconvey an impression, if only a fragmentary one, of what Jung wentthrough in the years 1913-1917, and of what he was bringing tobirth.The Sermons contain hints or anticipations of ideas that were tofigure later in his scientific writings, more particularly concerning thepolaristic nature of the psyche, of life in general, and of all psycho-logical statements. It was their thinking in paradoxes that drew Jungto the Gnostics. That is why he identifies himself here with theGnostic writer Basilides (early second century A.D.) and even takesover some of his terminology for example, God as Abraxas. It was adeliberate game of mystification.Jung consented to the publication of Seven Sermons in his Mem-oirs only hesitantly and only "for the sake of honesty." He neverdisclosed the key to the anagram at the end of the book.The Seven Sermons to the Dead written by Basilides in Alexandria,the City where the East toucheth the West

Sermo 1The dead came back from Jerusalem, where they found not whatthey sought. They prayed me let them in and besought my word,and thus I began my teaching.Harken: I begin with nothingness. Nothingness is the same asfullness. In infinity full is no better than empty. Nothingness is bothempty and full. As well might ye say anything else of nothingness, asfor instance, white is it, or black, or again, it is not, or it is. A thingthat is infinite and eternal hath no qualities, since it hath all qualities.This nothingness or fullness we name the PLEROMA. Therein boththinking and being cease, since the eternal and infinite possess noqualities. In it no being is, for he then would be distinct from thepleroma, and would possess qualities which would distinguish himas something distinct from the pleroma.In the pleroma there is nothing and everything. It is quite fruitless tothink about the pleroma, for this would mean self-dissolution.CRE ATURA is not in the pleroma, but in itself. The pleroma is bothbeginning and end of created beings. It pervadeth them, as the lightof the sun everywhere pervadeth the air. Although the pleromapervadeth altogether, yet hath created being no share thereof, justas  a wholly transparent body becometh neither light nor darkthrough the light which pervadeth it. We are, however, the pleromaitself, for we are a part of the eternal and infinite. But we have noshare thereof, as we are from the pleroma infinitely removed; notspirit- ually or temporally, but essentially, since we are distinguishedfrom the pleroma in our essence as creatura, which is confinedwithin time and space.

Ye t  b e c a us e  we  a r e  p a r t s  o f  t he  p le r o m a ,  t he  p le r o m a  i s  a ls o  i n us .Even in the smallest point is the pleroma endless, eternal, andentire, since small and great are qualities which are contained in it.It is that nothingness which is everywhere whole and continuous.Only figura- tively, therefore, do I speak of created being as a partof the pleroma. Because, actually , the pleroma is nowhere divided,since it is noth- ingness. We are also the whole pleroma, because,figuratively, the pleroma is the smallest point (assumed only, notexisting) in us and the boundless firmament about us. Butwherefore, then, do we speak of the pleroma at all, since it is thuseverything and nothing?I speak of it to make a beginning somewhere, and also to free youfrom the delusion that somewhere, either without or within, therestandeth something fixed, or in some way established, from thebeginning. Every so-called fixed and certain thing is only relative.That alone is fixed and certain which is subject to change.What is changeable, however, is creatura. Therefore is it the onething which is fixed and certain; because it hath qualities: it is evenquality itself.The question ariseth: How did creatura originate? Created beingscame to pass, not creatura; since created being is the very qualityof the pleroma, as much as non-creation which is the eternal death.In all times and places is creation, in all times and places is death.The pleroma hath all, distinctiveness and non-distinctiveness.Distinctiveness is creatura. It is distinct. Distinctiveness is its es-sence, and therefore it distinguished. Therefore man discriminatethbecause his nature is distinctiveness. Wherefore also hedistinguish- eth qualities of the pleroma which are not. Hedistinguished them out of his own nature. Therefore must he speakof qualities of the pleroma which are not.

What use, say ye, to speak of it? Saidst thou not thyself, there is noprofit in thinking upon the pleroma?That said I unto you, to free you from the delusion that we are ableto think about the pleroma. When we distinguish qualities of thepleroma, we are speaking from the ground of our owndistinctiveness and concerning our own distinctiveness. But wehave said nothing concerning the pleroma. Concerning our owndistinctiveness, how- ever, it is needful to speak, whereby we maydistinguish ourselves enough. Our very nature is distinctiveness. Ifwe are not true to this nature we do not distinguish ourselvesenough. Therefore must we make distinctions of qualities.What is the harm, ye ask, in not distinguishing oneself? If we do notdistinguish, we get beyond our own nature, away from creatura. Wefall into indistinctiveness, which is the other quality of the pleroma.We fall into the pleroma itself and cease to be creatures. We aregiven over to dissolution in the nothingness. This is the death of thecreature. Therefore we die in such measure as we do notdistinguish. Hence the natural striving of the creature goeth towardsdistinctiveness, fighteth against primeval, perilous sameness. Thisis  called the PBINCIPIUM INDIVIDUAHONIS. This principle is theessence of the creature. From this you can see whyindistinctiveness and non- distinction are a great danger for thecreature.We must, therefore, distinguish the qualities of the pleroma. Thequalities are PAIBS OF OPPOSITES, such asThe Effective and the Ineffective.Fullness and Emptiness.Living and Dead.

Difference and Sameness.Light and Darkness.The Hot and the Cold.Force and Matter.Time and Space.Good and Evil.Beauty and Ugliness.The One and the Many. etc.The pairs of opposites are qualities of the pleroma which are not,because each balanceth each. As we are the pleroma itself, wealso have all these qualities in us. Because the very ground of ournature is distinctiveness, therefore we have these qualities in thename and sign of distinctiveness, which meaneth1. These qualities are distinct and separate in us one from the other;therefore they are not balanced and v oid, but are effectiv e. Thus are we thevic t ims  of t he pairs  of oppos it es .  The pleroma is rent in us.2. The qualities belong to the pleroma, and only in the name and sign ofdistinctiveness can and must we possess or live them. We must distinguishourselves from qualities. In the pleroma they are balanced and v oid; in usnot. Being distinguished from them deliv ereth us.When we strive after the good or the beautiful, we thereby forget ourown nature, which is distinctiveness, and we are delivered over tothe qualities of the pleroma, which are pairs of opposites. We laborto attain to the good and the beautiful, yet at the same time we also

lay hold of the evil and the ugly, since in the pleroma these are onewith the good and the beautiful. When, however, we remain true toour own nature, which is distinctiveness, we distinguish ourselvesfrom the good and the beautiful, and, therefore, at the same time,from the evil and the ugly. And thus we fall not into the pleroma,namely, into nothingness and dissolution.Thou sayest, ye object, that difference and sameness are alsoqualities of the pleroma. How would it be, then, if we strive afterdifference? Are we, in so doing, not true to our own nature? Andmust we none the less be given over to sameness when we striveafter difference?Ye  m us t  no t  f o r g e t  t ha t  t he  p le r o m a  ha t h no  q ua li t i e s .  W e  c r e a t ethem through thinking. If, therefore, ye strive after difference or'sameness, or any qualities whatsoever, ye pursue thoughts whichflow to you out of the pleroma; thoughts, namely, concerning non-existing qualities of the pleroma. Inasmuch as ye run after thesethoughts, ye fall again into the pleroma, and reach difference andsameness at the same time. Not your thinking, but your being, isdistinctiveness. Therefore not after difference, as ye think it, must yestrive; but after YOUR OWN BEING. At bottom, therefore, there isonly one striving, namely, the striving after your own being. If ye hadthis striving ye would not need to know anything about the pleromaand its qualities, and yet would ye come to your right goal by virtueof your own being. Since, however, thought estrangeth from being,that knowledge must I teach you wherewith ye may be able to holdyour thought in leash.Sermo IIIn the night the dead stood along the wall and cried:

We would have knowledge of god. Where is god? Is god dead?God is not dead. Now, as ever, he liveth. God is creatura, for he issomething definite, and therefore distinct from the pleroma. God isquality of the pleroma, and everything which I said of creatura alsois true concerning him.He is distinguished, however, from created beings through this, thathe is more indefinite and indeterminable than they. He is lessdistinct than created beings, since the ground of his being iseffective fullness. Only in so far as he is definite and distinct is hecreatura, and in like measure is he the manifestation of the effectivefullness of the pleroma.Everything which we do not distinguish falleth into the pleroma andis made void by its opposite. If, therefore, we do not distinguishgod, effective fullness is for us extinguished.Moreover god is the pleroma itself, as likewise each smallest pointin the created and uncreated is the pleroma itself.Effective void is the nature of the devil. God and devil are the firstmanifestations of nothingness, which we call the pleroma. It is in-different whether the pleroma is or is not, since in everything it isbalanced and void. Not so creatura. In so far as god and devil arecreatura they do not extinguish each other, but stand one againstthe  other as effective opposites. We need no proof of theirexistence. It is enough that we must always be speaking of them.Even if both were not, creatura, of its own essential distinctiveness,would forever dis- tinguish them anew out of the pleroma.Everything that discrimination taketh out of the pleroma is a pair ofopposites. To god, therefore, always belongeth the devil.

This inseparability is as close and, as your own life hath made yousee, as indissoluble as the pleroma itself. Thus it is that both standvery close to the pleroma, in which all opposites are extinguishedand joined.God and devil are distinguished by the qualities fullness andemptiness, generation and destruction. EFFECTIVENESS iscommon to both. Effectiveness joineth them. Effectiveness,therefore, stahdeth above both; is a god above god, since in itseffect it uniteth fullness and emptiness.This is a god whom ye knew not, for mankind forgot it. We name itby its name ABRAXAS. It is more indefinite still than god and devil.That god may be distinguished from it, we name god HELIOS orSun. Abraxas is effect. Nothing standeth opposed to it but theineffec- tive; hence its effective nature freely unfoldeth itself. Theineffective is not, therefore resisteth not. Abraxas standeth abovethe sun and above the devil. It is improbable probability, unrealreality. Had the pleroma a being, Abraxas would be itsmanifestation. It is the effective itself, not any particular effect, buteffect in general.It is unreal reality, because it hath no definite effect.It is also creatura, because it is distinct from the pleroma.The sun hath a definite effect, and so hath the devil. Wherefore dothey appear to us more effective than indefinite Abraxas.It is force, duration, change.The dead now raised a great tumult, for they were Christians.Sermo III

Like mists arising from a marsh, the dead came near and cried:Speak further unto us concerning the supreme god.Hard to know is the deity of Abraxas. Its power is the greatest,because man perceiveth it not. From the sun he draweth the sum-mum bonum; from the devil the inftrnum mdlum; but from AbraxasLIFE, altogether indefinite, the mother of good and evil.Smaller and weaker life seemeth to be than the summum bonum;wherefore is it also hard to conceive that Abraxas transcendetheven the sun in power, who is himself the radiant source of all theforce of life.Abraxas is the sun, and at the same time the eternally suckinggorge of the void, the belittling and dismembering devil.The power of Abraxas is twofold; but ye see it not, because for youreyes the warring opposites of this power are extinguished,What the god-sun speaketh is life.What the devil speaketh is death.But Abraxas speaketh that hallowed and accursed word which islife and death at the same time.Abraxas begetteth truth and lying, good and evil, light and darkness,in the same word and in the same act. Wherefore is Abraxasterrible.It is splendid as the lion in the instant he striketh down his victim. Itis beautiful as a day of spring. It is the great Pan himself and alsothe small one. It is Priapos.

It is the monster of the under-world, a thousand-armed polyp, coiled knot of winged serpents, frenzy. It is the hermaphrodite of the earliest beginning. It is the lord of the toads and frogs, which live in the water and go up on the land, whose chorus ascendeth at noon and at midnight. It is abundance that seeketh union with emptiness. It is holy begetting. It is love and love's murder. It is the saint and his betrayer. It is the brightest light of day and the darkest night of madness. To look upon it, is blindness. To know it, is sickness. To worship it, is death. To fear it, is wisdom. To resist it not, is redemption. God dwelleth behind the sun, the devil behind the night What godbringeth forth out of the light the devil sucketji into the night. ButAbraxas is the world, its becoming and its passing. Upon every giftthat cometh from the god-sun the devil layeth his curse.Everything that ye entreat from the god-sun begetteth a deed of thedevil.Everything that ye create with the god-sun giveth effective power tothe devil.That is terrible Abraxas.It is the mightiest creature, and in it the creature is afraid of itself. Itis the manifest opposition of creatura to the pleroma and itsnothingness.

It is the son's horror of the mother. It is the mother's love for the son. It is the delight of the earth and the cruelty of the heav ens. Before its countenance man becometh like stone. Before it there is no question and no reply. It is the life of creatura. It is the operation of distinctiveness. It is the love of man. It is the speech of man. It is the appearance and the shadow of man. It is illusory reality. Now the dead howled and raged, for they were unperfected.Sermo IVThe dead filled the place murmuring and said:Tell us of gods and devils, accursed onelThe god-sun is the highest good; the devil is the opposite. Thushave ye two gods. But there are many high and good things andmany great evils. Among these are two god-devils; the one is theBURNING ONE, the other the GROWING ONE.The burning one is EROS, who hath the form of flame. Flame givethlight because it consumeth.The growing one is the TREE OF LIFE. It buddeth, as in growing itheapeth up living stuff.Eros flameth up and dieth. But the tree of life groweth with slow andconstant increase through unmeasured time.

Good and evil are united in the flame.Good and evil are united in the increase of the tree. In their divinitystand life and love opposed.Innumerable as the host of the stars is the number of gods anddevils.Each star is a god, and each space that a star filleth is a devil. Butthe empty-fullness of the whole is the pleroma.The operation of the whole is Abraxas, to whom only the ineffec-tive standeth opposed.Four is the number of the principal gods, as four is the number ofthe world's measurements.One is the beginning, the god-sun.Two i s Eros; for he bi ndeth twai n together and outspreadeth himselfin brightness.Three is the Tree of Life, for it filleth space with bodily forms.Four is the devil, for he openeth all that is closed. All that is formedof bodily nature doth he dissolve; he is the destroyer in whomeverything is brought to nothing.For me, to whom knowledge hath been given of the multiplicity anddiversity of the gods, it is well. But woe unto you, who replace theseincompatible many by a single god. For in so doing ye beget thetorment which is bred from not understanding, and ye mutilate thecreature whose nature and aim is distinctiveness. How can ye betrue to your own nature when ye try to change the many into one?What ye do unto the gods is done likewise unto you. Y e all become

equal and thus is your nature maimed.Equality shall prevail not for god, but only for the sake of man. Forthe gods are many, whilst men are few. The gods are mighty andcan endure their manifoldness. For like the stars they abide insolitude, parted one from the other by immense distances. But menare weak and cannot endure their manifold nature. Therefore theydwell together and need communion, that they may bear their sepa-rateness. For redemption's sake I teach you the rejected truth, forthe sake of which I was rejected.The multiplicity of the gods corresponded! to the multiplicity of man.Numberless gods await the human state. Numberless gods havebeen men. Man shareth in the nature of the gods. He cometh fromthe gods and goeth unto god.Thus, just as it serveth not to reflect upon the pleroma, it availeth notto worship the multiplicity of the gods. Least of all availeth it toworship the first god, the effective abundance and the summumbonum. By our prayer we can add to it nothing, and from it nothingtake; because the effective void swalloweth all.The bright gods form the celestial world. It is manifold and infi- nitelyspreading and increasing. The god-sun is the supreme lord of thatworld.The dark gods form the earth-world. They are simple and infinitelydiminishing and declining. The devil is the earth-world's lowest lord,the moon-spirit, satellite of the earth, smaller, colder, and moredead than the earth.There is no difference between the might of the celestial gods andthose of the earth. The celestial gods magnify, the earth-gods

dimin- ish. Measureless is the movement of both.Sermo VThe dead mocked and cried: Teach us, fool, of the church and holycommunion.The world of the gods is made manifest in spirituality and insexuality. The celestial ones appear in spirituality, the earthly insexuality.Spirituality conceiveth and embraceth. It is womanlike and thereforewe call it MATER COELESTIS, the celestial mother. Sexualityengendereth and createth. It is manlike, and therefore we call itPHAIJLOS, the earthly father.The sexuality of man is more of the earth, the sexuality of woman ismore of the, spirit.The spirituality of man is more of heaven, it goeth to tie greater.The spirituality of woman is more of tie earth, it goeth to the smaller.Lying and devilish is the spirituality of the man which goeth to thesmaller.Lying and devilish is the spirituality of the woman which goeth to thegreater.Each must go to its own place.Man and woman become devils one to the other when they dividenot their spiritual ways, for the nature of creatura is distinctiveness.The sexuality of man hath an earthward course, the sexuality of

woman a spiritual. Man and woman become devils one to the otherif they distinguish not their sexuality.Man shall know of the smaller, woman the greater.Man shall distinguish himself both from spirituality and fromsexuality. He shall call spirituality Mother, and set her betweenheaven and earth. He shall call sexuality Phallos, and set him be-tween himself and earth. For the Mother and the Phallos are super-human daemons which reveal the world of the gods. They are for usmore effective than the gods, because they are closely akin to ourown nature. Should ye not distinguish yourselves from sexuality andfrom spirituality, and not regard them as of a nature both above youand beyond, then are ye delivered over to them as qualities of thepleroma. Spirituality and sexuality are not your qualities, not thingswhich ye possess and contain. But they possess and contain you;for they are powerful daemons, manifestations of the gods, and are,therefore, things which reach beyond you, existing in themselves.No man hath a spirituality unto himself, or a sexuality unto himself.But he standeth under the law of spirituality and of sexuality.No man, therefore, escapeth these daemons. Ye shall look uponthem as daemons, and as a common task and danger, a commonburden which life hath laid upon you. Thus is life for you also acommon task and danger, as are the gods, and first of all terribleAbraxas.Man is weak, therefore is communion indispensable. If your com-munion be not under the sign of the Mother, then is it under the signof the Phallos. No communion is suffering and sickness.Communion in everything is dismemberment and dissolution.Distinctiveness leadeth to singleness. Singleness is opposed tocom- munion. But because of man's weakness over against the

gods and daemons and their invincible law is communion needful.Therefore shall there be as much communion as is needful, not forman's sake, but because of the gods. The gods force you tocommunion. As much as they force you, so much is communionneeded, more is evil.In communion let every man submit to others, that communion bemaintained; for ye need it.In singleness the one man shall be superior to the others, that everyman may come to himself and avoid slavery.In communion there shall be continence.In singleness there shall be prodigality.Communion is depth.Singleness is height.Right measure in communion purifieth and preserveth.Right measure in singleness purifieth and increaseth.Communion giveth us warmth, singleness giveth us light.Sermo VIThe daemon of sexuality approacheth our soul as a serpent. It ishalf human and appeareth as thought-desire.The daemon of spirituality descendeth into our soul as the whitebird. It is half human and appeareth as desire-thought.The serpent is an earthy soul, half daemonic, a spirit, and akin to

the spirits of the dead. Thus too, like these, she swarmeth around inthe things of earth, making us either to fear them or pricking us withintemperate desires. The serpent hath a nature like unto woman.She seeketh ever the company of the dead who are held by thespell of the earth, they who found not the way beyond that leadeth tosingleness. The serpent is a whore. She wantoneth with the deviland  with evil spirits; a mischievous tyrant and tormentor, everseducing to evilest company. The white bird is a half-celestial soulof man. He bideth with the Mother, from time to time descending-The bird hath a nature like unto man, and is effective thought. He ischaste and solitary, a messenger of the Mother. He flieth highabove earth. He commandeth singleness. He bringeth knowledgefrom the distant ones who went before and are perfected. Hebeareth our word above to the Mother. She intercedeth, shewarneth, but against the gods she hath no power. She is a vessel ofthe sun. The serpent goeth below and with her cunning she lameththe phallic daemon, or else goadeth him on. She yieldeth up the toocrafty thoughts of the earthy one, those thoughts which creepthrough every hole and cleave to all things with desirousness. Theserpent, doubtless, willeth it not, yet she must be of use to us. Shefleeth our grasp, thus showing us the way, which with our humanwits we could not find.With disdainful glance the dead spake: Cease this talk of gods anddaemons and souls. At bottom this hath long been known to us.Sermo VIIYe t  whe n ni g ht  wa s  c o m e  t he  d e a d  a g a i n a p p r o a c he d  wi t h la m e n-table mien and said: There is yet one matter we forgot to mention.Teach us about man.Man is a gateway, through which from the outer world of gods,daemons, and souls ye pass into the inner world; out of the greater

into the smaller world. Small and transitory is man. Already is hebehind you, and once again ye find yourselves in endless space, inthe smaller or innermost infinity. At immeasurable distance standethone single Star in the zenith.This is the one god of this one man. This is his world, his pleroma,his divinity.In this world is man Abraxas, the creator and the destroyer of hisown world.This Star is the god and the goal of man.This is his one guiding god. In him goeth man to his rest. Towardhim goeth the long journey of the soul after death. In him shinethforth as light all that man bringeth back from the greater world. T othis one god man shall pray.Prayer increaseth the light of the Star. It casteth a bridge overdeath. It prepareth life for the smaller world and assuageth thehopeless desires of the greater.When the greater world waxeth cold, burneth the Star.Between man and his one god there standeth nothing, so long asman can turn away his eyes from the flaming spectacle of Abraxas.Man here, god there.Weakness and nothingness here, there eternally creative power.Here nothing but darkness and chilling moisture.There wholly sun.

Whereupon the dead were silent and ascended like the smokeabovethe herdsman's fire, who through the night kept watch over his flock.ANAGRAMMA:NAHTRIHECCUNDEGAHINNEVERAHTUNINZEHGESSURKLACHZUNNUS.(Translated by H. G. Baynes)

GlossaryAmplification. Elaboration and clarification of a dream-image bymeans of directed association (q.v.) and of parallels from thehuman sciences (symbology, mythology, mysticism, folklore, historyof reli- gion, ethnology, etc.).Anima and Animus. Personification of the feminine nature of aman's unconscious and the masculine nature of a woman's. Thispsychologi- cal bisexuality is a reflection of the biological fact that itis the larger number of male (or female) genes which is the decisivefactor in the determination of sex. The smaller number ofcontrasexual genes seems to produce a correspondingcontrasexual character, which usually re- mains unconscious.Anima and animus manifest themselves most typically inpersonified form as figures in dreams and fantasies ("dream girl,""dream lover"), or in the irrationalities of a man's feeling and awoman's thinking. As regulators of behavior they are two of themost influential archetypes ( q.v. ) .C. G. JUNG: "Every man carries within him the eternal image ofwoman, not the image of this or that particular woman, but a defini-tive feminine image. This image is fundamentally unconscious, anhereditary factor of primordial origin engraved in the living organicsystem of the man, an imprint or 'archetype' [q.v.] of all the ancestralexperiences of the female, a deposit, as it were, of all theimpressions ever made by woman... Since this image isunconscious, it is al- ways unconsciously projected upon the personof the beloved, and is one of the chief reasons for passionateattraction or aversion."(The Development of Personality, GW 17, p. 198)

"In its primary 'unconscious' form the animus is a compound ofspontaneous, unpremeditated opinions which exercise a powerfulin-  fluence on the woman's emotional life, while the anima issimilarly compounded of feelings which thereafter influence ordistort the man's understanding ('she has turned his head').Consequently the animus likes to project itself upon 'intellectuals'and aH kinds of *heroes,* including tenors, artists, sportingcelebrities, etc. The anima has a predilection for everything that isunconscious, dark, equivocal, and unrelated in woman, and also forher vanity, frigidity, helpless- ness, and so forth."(The Practice of Psychotherapy, CW 16, par. 521)"... no man can converse with an animus for five minutes withoutbecoming the victim of his own anima. Anyone who still had enoughsense of humour to listen objectively to the ensuing dialogue wouldbe staggered by the vast number of commonplaces, misappliedtruisms, cliches from newspapers and novels, shop-soiledplatitudes of every description interspersed with vulgar abuse andbrain-splitting lack of logic. It is a dialogue which, irrespective of itsparticipants, is repeated millions and millions of times in alllanguages of the world and always remains essentially the same."(Aion, CW 9, u, p. 15)Ti e natural functi on of the ani mus ( as well as of the*ani ma ) i s toremain in [their] place between individual consciousness and thecollective unconscious [q.v.]; exactly as the persona [q.v.] is a sort ofstratum between the ego-consciousness and die objects of theexternal world. The animus and the anima should function as abridge, or a door, leading to the images of the collectiveunconscious, as the persona should be a sort of bridge into theworld."(Unpublished Seminar Notes. "Visions" I, p. 116)

Archetype, C. G. JUNG: "The concept of the archetype ... is derivedfrom the repeated observation that, for instance, the myths andfairy- tales of world literature contain definite motifs which crop upevery- where. We meet these same motifs in the fantasies, dreams,deliria, and delusions of individuals living today. These typicalimages and associations are what I call archetypal ideas. The morevivid they are, the more they will be coloured by particularly strongfeeling- tones... They impress, influence, and fascinate us. Theyhave their origin in the archetype, which in itself is anirrepresentable, uncon- scious, pre-existent form that seems to bepart of the inherited struc- ture of the psyche and can thereforemanifest itself spontaneously anywhere, at any time. Because of itsinstinctual nature, the arche- type underlies the feeling-tonedcomplexes [q.v.] and shiares their autonomy." (Civilization inTransition, CW 10, par. 847)"Again and again I encounter the mistaken notion that an archetypeis determined in regard to its content, in other words that it is a kindof unconscious idea (if such an expression be admissible). It isneces- sary to point out once more that archetypes are notdetermined as regards their content, but only as regards their formand then only to a very limited degree. A primordial image [9.1?.] isdetermined as to its content only when it has "become consciousand is therefore filled out with the material of conscious experience.Its form, however, ... might perhaps be compared to the axialsystem of a crystal, which, as it were, preforms the crystallinestructure in the mother liquid, although it has no material existenceof its own. This first ap- pears according to the specific way inwhich the ions and molecules aggregate. The archetype in itself isempty and purely formal, nothing but a facultas praeformandi, apossibility of representation which is given a priori. Therepresentations themselves are not inherited, only file forms, and inthat respect they correspond in every way to the instincts, which are

also determined in form only. The existence of the instincts can nomore be proved than the existence of the arche- types, so long asthey do not manifest themselves concretely." ( The Archetypes andthe Collective Unconscious, CW 9, i, pp. 79 f.) "... it seems to meprobable that the real nature of the archetype is not capable ofbeing made conscious, that it is transcendent, on which account Icall it psychoid [qr.t?.].*( The Structure and Dynamics of the Psyche, CW 8, p. 213)Association. The linking of ideas, perceptions, etc. according tosimi- larity, coexistence, opposition, and causal dependence. Freeassocia- tion in Freudian dream interpretation: spontaneous ideasoccurring to the dreamer, which need not necessarily refer to thedream situa- tion. Directed or controlled association in Jungiandream interpreta- tion: spontaneous ideas which proceed from agiven dream situation and constantly relate to it.Association test Methods for discovering complexes (9.1?.) bymeas- uring the reaction time and interpreting the answers to givenstimulus words. Complex-indicators: prolonged reaction time,faults, or the idiosyncratic quality of the answers when the stimuluswords touch on complexes which the subject wishes to hide or ofwhich he is not conscious.Complex, C. G. JUNG: "Complexes are psychic fragments whichhave split off owing to traumatic influences or certain incompatibletenden- cies. As the association experiments prove, complexesinterfere with the intentions of the will and disturb the consciousperformance; they produce disturbances of memory and blockagesin the flow of associa- tions [qr.tx]; they appear and disappearaccording to their own laws; they can temporarily obsessconsciousness, or influence speech and action in an unconsciousway. In a word, complexes behave like inde- pendent beings, a fact

especially evident in abnormal states of mind. In the voices heardby the insane they even take on a personal ego- character like thatof the spirits who manifest themselves through automatic writingand similar techniques."( The Structure and Dynamics of the Psyche, CW 8, p. 121 )Consciousness, C. G. JUNG: "When one reflects upon whatconscious- ness really is, one is profoundly impressed by theextreme wonder of the fact that an event which takes place outsidein the cosmos simul- taneously produces an internal image, that ittakes place, so to speak, inside as well, which is to say: becomesconscious."(Basel Seminar, privately printed, 1934, p. i) "For indeed ourconsciousness does not create itself it wells up from unknowndepths. In childhood it awakens gradually, and all through life itwakes each morning out of the depths of sleep from anunconscious condition. It is like a child that is born daily out of theprimordial womb of the unconscious."(Psychology and Religion: West and East, CW 11, pp. 569 f . )Dream, C. G. JUNG: "The dream is a little hidden door in theinnermost and most secret recesses of the psyche, opening intothat cosmic night which was psyche long before there was any ego-consciousness, and which wiH remain psyche no matter how far ourego-consciousness may extend... All consciousness separates; butin dreams we put on the likeness of that more universal, truer, moreeternal man dwell- ing in the darkness of primordial night. There heis still the whole, and the whole is in him, indistinguishable fromnature and bare of all egohood. Out of these aU-uniting depthsarises the dream, be it never so childish, grotesque, and immoral."

(Civilteation in Transition, CW 10, pars. 304 f.)Extraversion. Attitude-type characterized by concentration ofinterest on the external object. See Introversion.God-image. A term derived from the Church Fathers, according towhom the imago Dei is imprinted on the human soul. When such animage is spontaneously produced in dreams, fantasies, visions,etc. it is, from the psychological point of view, a symbol of the self (q.v. ), of psychic wholeness.C. G. JUNG: "It is only through the psyche that we can establish thatGod acts upon us, but we are unable to distinguish whether theseactions emanate from God or from the unconscious. We cannot tellwhether God and the unconscious are two different entities. Bothare  border-line concepts for transcendental contents. Butempirically it can be established, with a sufficient degree ofprobability, that there is in the unconscious an archetype ofwholeness which manifests it- self spontaneously in dreams, etc.,and a tendency, independent of the conscious will, to relate otherarchetypes to fids centre. Conse- quently, it does not seemimprobable that the archetype produces a symbolism which hasalways characterized and expressed the Deity ... The God-imagedoes not coincide with the unconscious as such, but with a specialcontent of it, namely the archetype of the self. It is this archetypefrom which we can no longer distinguish the God- imageempirically."( Psychology and Religion; West and East, CW 11, pp. 468 )"One can, then, explain the God-image ... as a reflection of the self,or, conversely, explain the self as an imago Dei in man."Hierosgamos. Sacred or spiritual marriage, union of archetypal

figures in the rebirth mysteries of antiquity and also in alchemy .Typi cal examples are the representation of Christ and the Churchas bride- groom and bride (sponsus et sponsa) and the alchemicalconjunction of sun and moon.Individuation. C. G. JUNG: "I use the term 'individuation* to denotethe process by which a person becomes a psychological 'in-dividual/ that is, a separate, indivisible unity or 'whole.*"( The Archetypes and the Collective Unconscious, CW 9, i, p. 275)Individuation means becoming a single, homogeneous being, and,in so far as 'individuality' embraces our innermost, last, and incom-parable uniqueness, it also implies becoming one's own self. Wecould therefore translate individuation as 'coming to selfhood' or'self-reali- zation/ " ( Two Essays on Analytical Psychology, CW 7,par. 266)"But again and again I note that the individuation process is con-fused with the coming of the ego into consciousness and that theego  is in consequence identified with the self, which naturallyproduces a hopeless conceptual muddle. Individuation is thennothing but ego- centredness and autoeroticism. But the selfcomprises infinitely more than a mere ego ... It is as much one'sself, and all other selves, as the ego. Individuation does not shutone out from the world, but gathers the world to oneself."{ The Structure and Dynamics of the Psyche, CW 8, p. 226 )Inflation. Expansion of the personality beyond its proper limits byidentification with the persona or with an archetype, or inpathological cases with a historical or religious figure. It producesan exaggerated sense of one's self-importance and is usuallycompen- sated by feelings of inferiority.

Introversion. Attitude-type characterized by orientation in Methrough subjective psychic contents. See Extraversion.Mana. Melanesian word for extraordinarily effective power emanat-ing from a human being, object, action, or event, or fromsupernatural beings and spirits. Also health, prestige, power towork magic and to heal. A primitive concept of psychic energy.Mandala (Sanskrit). Magic circle. In Jung, symbol of the center, thegoal, or the self (q.t?.) as psychic totality; self -representation of apsychic process of centering; production of a new center of person-ality. This is symbolically represented by the circle, the square, orthe quaternity (q-v), by symmetrical arrangements of the numberfour and its multiples. In Lamism and T antric Y oga the mandala isan instrument of contemplation (yantra), seat and birthplace of thegods. Disturbed mandala: Any form that deviates from the circle >square, or equal-armed cross, or whose basic number is not four orits multiples.C. G. JUNG: "Mandala means a circle, more especially a magiccircle, and this form of symbol is not only to be found all through theEast, but also among us; mandalas are amply represented in theMiddle Ages. The specifically Christian ones come from the earlierMiddle Ages. Most of them show Christ in the centre, with the fourevange- lists, or their symbols, at the cardinal points. Thisconception must be a very ancient one because Horus wasrepresented with his four sons in the same way by the Egyptians...For the most part, the man- dala form is that of a flower, cross, orwheel, with a distinct tendency toward four as the basis of thestructure."(Commentary to Secret of the Golden Flower, CW 13, par. 31,mod. )

"Mandalas... usually appear in situations of psychic confusion andperplexity. The archetype thereby constellated represents a pat-tern of order which, like a psychological View-finder' marked with across or circle divided into four, is superimposed on the psychicchaos so that each content falls into place and the weltering con-fusion is held together by the protective circle ... At the same timethey are yantras, instruments with whose help the order is broughtinto being." ( Civilization in Transition, CW 10, par. 803 )Numinosum. Rudolf Otto's term (in his Idea of the Holy) for the in-expressible, mysterious, terrifying, directly experienced and pertain-ing only to the divinity.Persona. Originally, the mask worn by an actor.C. G. JUNG: "The persona ... is the individual's system of adapta-tion to, or the manner he assumes in dealing with, the world. Everycalling or profession, for example, has its own characteristicpersona. ... Only, the danger is that [people] become identical withtheir personas the professor with his text-book, the tenor with hisvoice. ... One could say, with a little exaggeration, that the personais that which in reality one is not, but which oneself as well as othersthink one is."( The Archetypes and the Collective Unconscious, CW 9, i, pp. 122f . ) "Primordial image. (Jakob Burckhardt) T erm originally used by Jungfor archetype (q.v.).Psychoid. "Soul-like" or "quasi-psychic."C. G. JUNG: *... the collective unconscious... represents a psychethat... cannot be directly perceived or 'represented/ in contrast to

the perceptible psychic phenomena, and on account of its'irrepresentable* nature I have called it 'psychoid.* *( The Structure and Dynamics of the Psyche, CW 8, p. 436)Quaternity. C. G. JUNG: "The quaternity is an archetype of almostuni- versal occurrence. It forms the logical basis for any wholejudgment. If one wishes to pass such a judgment, it must have thisfourfold aspect. For instance, if you want to describe the horizon asa whole, you name the four quarters of heaven.... There are alwaysfour elements, four prime qualities, four colours, four castes, fourways of spiritual development, etc. So, too, there are four aspectsof psycho- logical orientation ... In order to orient ourselves, we musthave a function which ascertains that something is there(sensation); a sec- ond function which established what is is(thinking); a third function which states whether it suits us or not,whether we wish to accept it or not (feeling), and a fourth functionwhich indicates where it came from and where it is going (intuition).When this has been done, there is nothing more to say.... The idealof completeness is the circle or sphere, but its natural minimaldivision is a quaternity."(Psychology and Religion: West and East, CW 11, p. 167) Aquaternity or quaternion often has a 3 + i structure, in that one of theterms composing it occupies an exceptional position or has anature unlike that of the others. (For instance three of the symbols ofthe Evangelists are animals and that of the fourth, of St. Luke, is anangel.) This is the "Fourth" which, added to the other three, makesthem "One," symbolizing totality. In analytical psychology often the"inferior" function (i.e., that function which is not at the consciousdisposal of the subject) represents the "Fourth," and its integrationinto consciousness is one of the major tasks of the process of indi-viduation

Self. The central archetype (. ); the archetype of order; the totality ofthe personality. Symbolized by circle, square, quaternity (9.1?.),child, mandala ( q.v. ) , etc.C. G. JUNG: "... the self is a quantity that is supraordinate to theconscious ego. It embraces not only the conscious but also the un-conscious psyche, and is therefore, so to speak, a personalitywhich we also are.... There is little hope of our ever being able toreach even approximate consciousness of the self, since howevermuch we may make conscious there will always exist anindeterminate and in- determinable amount of unconscious materialwhich belongs to the totality of the self."(Two Essays on Analytical Psychology, CW 7, par. 274)"The self is not only the centre but also the whole circumferencewhich embraces both conscious and unconscious; it is the centre ofthis totality, just as the ego is the centre of consciousness."(Psychology and Alchemy, CW 12, par. 44)"... the self is our lif e's goal, for it is the completest expression ofthat fateful combination we call individuality..."( Two Essays on Analytical Psychology, CW 7, par. 404)Shadow. The inferior part of the personality; sum of all personal andcollective psychic elements which, because of their incompatibilitywith the chosen conscious attitude, are denied expression in lifeand  therefore coalesce into a relatively autonomous "splinterpersonality" with contrary tendencies in the unconscious. Theshadow behaves compensatorily to consciousness; hence itseffects can be positive as well as negative. In dreams, the shadowfigure is always of the same sex as the dreamer.

C. G. JUNG: "The shadow personifies everything that the subjectre- fuses to acknowledge about himself and yet is always thrustingitself upon him directly or indirectly for instance, inferior traits ofcharac- ter and other incompatible tendencies." ( The Archetypesand the Collective Unconscious, CW 9, i, pp. 284 f . )"... the shadow [is] that hidden, repressed, for the most part in-ferior and guilt-laden personality whose ultimate ramifications reachback into the realm of our animal ancestors and so comprise thewhole historical aspect of the unconscious. ... If it has been be-lieved hitherto that the human shadow was the source of all evil, itcan now be ascertained on closer investigation that theunconscious man, that is, his shadow, does not consist only ofmorally reprehensi- ble tendencies, but also displays a number ofgood qualities, such as normal instincts, appropriate reactions,realistic insights, creative impulses, etc." ( Aton, CW 9, u, p. 266 )Soul. C. G. JUNG: If the human [soul] is anything, it must be of un-imaginable complexity and diversity , so that it cannot possibly beapproached through a mere psychology of instinct. I can only gazewith wonder and awe at the depths and heights of our psychicnature. Its non-spatial universe conceals an untold abundance ofimages which have accumulated over millions of years of livingdevelopment and become fixed in the organism. My consciousnessis like an eye that penetrates to the most distant spaces, yet it is thepsychic non-ego that fills them with nonspatial images. And theseimages are not pale shadows, but tremendously powerful psychicfactors.... Beside this picture I would like to place the spectacle ofthe starry heavens at night, for the only equivalent of the universewithin is the universe without; and just as I reach this .world throughthe medium of the body, so I reach that world through the medium ofthe psyche."( Freud and Psychoanalysis, CW 4, pp. 331 f . )

*lt would be blasphemy to assert that God can manifest Himselfeverywhere save only in the human soul. Indeed the very intimacy ofthe relationship between Cod and the soul automatically precludesany devaluation of the latter. It would be going perhaps too far tospeak of an affinity; but at all events the soul must contain in itselfthe faculty of relation to God, i.e. a correspondence, otherwise acon- nection could never come about This correspondence is, inpsycho- logical terms, the archetype of the God-image [q.v.]"(Psychology and Alchemy, CW 12, par. 11)Synchronicity . A term coined by Jung to designate the meaningfulcoincidence or equivalence (a) of a psychic and a physical state orevent which have no causal relationship to one another. Such syn-chronistic phenomena occur, for instance, when an inwardly per-ceived event (dream, vision, premonition, etc.) is seen to have acorrespondence in external reality: the inner image of premonitionhas "come true"; (fc) of similar or identical thoughts, dreams, etc.oc- curring at the same time in different places. Neither the one northe other coincidence can be explained by causality, but seems tobe con- nected primarily with activated archetypal processes in theuncon- scious.C. G. JUNG: "My preoccupation with the psychology of unconsciousprocesses long ago compelled me to look about for anotherprinciple of explanation, because the causality principle seemed tome in- adequate to explain certain remarkable phenomena of thepsychology of the unconscious. Thus I found that there are psychicparallelisms which cannot be related to each other causally, butwhich must be connected through another principle, namely the

contingency of events. This connection of events seemed to meessentially given by the fact of their relative simultaneity, hence theterm 'synchronistic/ It seems, indeed, as though time, far from beingan abstraction, is a concrete continuum which contains qualities orbasic conditions that manifest themselves simultaneously indifferent places through paral- lelisms that cannot be explainedcausally, as, for example, in cases of the simultaneous occurrenceof identical thoughts, symbols, or psychic states." ("RichardWilhelm: In Memoriam," CW 15, par. 81, mod.)"I chose this term because the simultaneous occurrence of twomeaningfully but not causally connected events seemed to me anessential criterion. I am therefore using the general concept of syn-chronicity in the special sense of a coincidence in time of two ormore causally unrelated events which have the same or a similarmeaning, in contrast to 'synchronism/ which simply means thesimultaneous oc- currence of two events."( The Structure and Dynamics of the Psyche, CW 8, p. 441 )"Synchronicity is no more baffling or mysterious than the discon-tinuities of physics. It is only the ingrained belief in the sovereignpower of causality that creates intellectual difficulties and makes itappear unthinkable that causeless events exist or could ever occur.. . , Meaningful coincidences are thinkable as pure chance. But themore they multiply and the greater and more exact the correspond-ence is, the more their probability sinks and their unthinkability in-creases, until they can no longer be regarded as pure chance but,for lack of a causal explanation, have to be thought of as meaningfular- rangements.... Their 'inexplicability* is not due to the fact that thecause is unknown, but to the fact that a cause is not even thinkablein intellectual terms." ( Ibid., pp. 518 f . )Unconscious, the. C. G. JUNG: "Theoretically, no limits can be set

to  the field of consciousness, since it is capable of indefiniteextension. Empirically , however, it always finds its limit when itcomes up against the unknown. This consists of everything we donot know, which, therefore, is not related to the ego as the centre ofthe field of consciousness. The unknown falls into two groups ofobjects: those which are outside and can be experienced by thesenses, and those which are inside and are experiencedimmediately . The first group comprises the unknown in the outerworld; the second the unknown in the inner world. We call this latterterritory the unconscious! 9(Aion, CW 9, u, p. 3)"... everything of which I know, but of which I am not at the momentthinking; everything of which I was once conscious but have nowforgotten; everything perceived by my senses, but not noted by myconscious mind; everything which, involuntarily and without pay- ingattention to it, I feel, think, remember, want, and do; all the futurethings that are taking shape in me and will sometime come toconsciousness: all this is the content of the unconscious."(The Structure and Dynamics of the Psyche, CW 8, p. 185)"Besides these we must include all more or less intentional repres-sions of painful thoughts and feelings. I call the sum of all these con-tents the "personal unconscious/ But, over and above that, we alsofind in the unconscious qualities that are not individually acquiredbut are inherited, e.g., instincts as impulses to carry out actionsfrom  necessity, without conscious motivation. In this 'deeper'stratum we also find the... archetypes... The instincts andarchetypes to- gether form the 'collective unconscious/ I call it'collective' because, unlike the personal unconscious, it is not madeup of individual and more or less unique contents but of those whichare universal and of regular occurrence." (Ibid., pp. 133 f . )

The first group comprises contents which are integral componentsof the individual personality and therefore could just as well be con-scious; the second group forms, as it were, an omnipresent,unchang- ing, and everywhere identical quality or substrate of thepsyche per ser ( Aion, CW 9, ii, p. 7)The deeper layers* of the psyche lose their individual uniquenessas they retreat farther and farther into darkness. Xower down/ that isto say as they approach the autonomous functional systems, theybecome increasingly collective until they are universalized and ex-tinguished in the body's materiality, i.e., in chemical substances.The body's carbon is simply carbon. Hence *at bottom' the psycheis simply 'world/ *(The Archetypes and the Collective Unconscious, CW 9, i, p. 173)The Collected Works of C. G. JungThe publication of the first complete collected edition, in English, ofthe works of C. G. Jung has been undertaken by Roudedge andKegan Paul, Ltd., in England and by Bollingen Foundation in theUnited States. Sir Herbert Read, Dr. Michael Fordham, Dr. GerhardAdler, and William McGuire compose the Editorial Committee; thetranslator is R. F. C. Hull. Since 1967, Princeton University Presshas been the American publisher.In the following list, dates of original publication are given inparentheses (of original composition, in brackets). Multiple datesindicate revisions.Dagger (t ) denotes volumes in preparation.1. PSYCHIATRIC STUDIES

On the Psychology and Pathology of So-Called Occult Phenomena(1902)On Hysterical Misreading (1904)Cryptomnesia (1905)On Manic Mood Disorder (1903)A Case of Hysterical Stupor in a Prisoner in Detention (1902)On Simulated Insanity (1903)A Medical Opinion on a Case of Simulated Insanity ( 1904)A Third and Final Opinion on Two Contradictory Psychiatric Diag-noses (1906)On the Psychological Diagnosis of Facts ( 1905)2. EXPERIMENTAL RESEARCHESTRANSLATED BY LEOPOLD STEININ COLLABORATION WITH DIANA RIVIEREStudies in Word Association (1904-7, 1910)The Associations of Normal Subjects (by Jung and F. Rikhn)An Analysis of the Associations of an EpilepticThe Collected Works of C. G. JungThe Reaction-Time Ratio in the Association Experiment

Experimental Observations on the Faculty of MemoryPsychoanalysis and Association ExperimentsThe Psychological Diagnosis of EvidenceAssociation, Dream, and Hysterical SymptomThe Psychopathological Significance of the AssociationExperimentDisturbances in Reproduction in tihe Association ExperimentThe Association MethodThe Family ConstellationPsychophysical Researches (1907-8)On the Psychophysical Relations of the Association ExperimentPsychophysical Investigations with the Galvanometer and Pneumo-graph in Normal and Insane Individuals (by F. Peterson and Jung)Further Investigations on the Galvanic Phenomenon andRespiration in Normal and Insane Individuals (by C. Ricksher andJung)Appendix: Statistical Details of Enlistment (1906); New Aspects ofCriminal Psychology (1908); The Psychological Methods ofInvestigation Used in the Psychiatric Clinic of the University ofZurich (1910); On the Doctrine of Complexes ( [1911] 1913); On thePsychological Diagnosis of Evidence (1937)3. THE PSYCHO GENESIS OF MENTAL DISEASE

The Psychology of Dementia Praecox ( 1907)The Content of the Psychoses (1908/1914)On Psychological Understanding (1914)A Criticism of Bleuler's Theory of Schizophrenic Negativism (1911)On the Importance of the Unconscious in Psychopathology (1914)On the Problem of Psychogenesis in Mental Disease (1919)Mental Disease and the Psyche ( 1928 )On the Psychogenesis of Schizophrenia ( 1939)Recent Thoughts on Schizophrenia (1957)Schizophrenia (1958)4. FREUD AND PSYCHOANALYSISFreud's Theory of Hysteria: A Reply to Aschaffenburg (1906)The Freudian Theory of Hysteria (1908)The Analysis of Dreams ( 1909)A Contribution to the Psychology of Rumour ( 1910-11)On die Significance of Number Dreams ( 1910-11)Morton Prince, "Mechanism and Interpretation of Dreams": A Criti-cal Review (1911)On the Criticism of Psychoanalysis (1910)

Concerning Psychoanalysis ( 19151)The Theory of Psychoanalysis (1913)General Aspects of Psychoanalysis (1913)Psychoanalysis and Neurosis (1916)Some Crucial Points in Psychoanalysis: The Jung-Loy Correspond-ence (1914)Prefaces to "Collected Papers on Analytical Psychology" (1916,1917)The Significance of the Father in the Destiny of the Individual(1909/1949)Introduction to Kranefeldt's "Secret Ways of the Mind" (1930)Freud and Jung: Contrasts (1929)5. SYMBOLS OF TRANSFORMATION (1912/1952)Original German version, Wandlungen und Symbole der Libido,1912 ( = Psychology of the Unconscious); present extensivelyrevised version, 1952.Appendix: The Miller Fantasies6. PSYCHOLOGICAL TYPES (l92l)Appendix: Four Papers on Psychological Typology (1913, 1925,1931, 1936)7. TWO ESSAYS ON ANALYTICAL PSYCHOLOGY

On the Psychology of the Unconscious ( 1917/1926/1943) TheRelations between the Ego and the Unconscious ( 1928)New Paths in Psychology ( 1912)The Structure of the Unconscious (1916)8. THE STRUCTURE AND DYNAMICS OF THE PSYCHEOn Psychic Energy (1928)The Transcendent Function ( [1916/1957)The Collected Works of C. G. JungA Review of the Complex Theory ( 1934)The Significance of Constitution and Heredity in Psychology ( 1929)Psychological Factors Determining Human Behaviour (1937)Instinct and the Unconscious (1919)The Structure of the Psyche ( 1927/1931 )On the Nature of the Psyche ( 1947/1954)General Aspects of Dream Psychology (1916/1948)On the Nature of Dreams ( 1945/1948)The Psychological Foundations of Belief in Spirits ( 1920/1948)Spirit and Life (1926)

Basic Postulates of Analytical Psychology (193*)Analytical Psychology and Weltanschauung (1928/1931)The Real and the Surreal (1933)The Stages of Life ( 1930-1931)The Soul and Death ( 1934)Synchronicity: An Acausal Connecting Principle (1952)

