Dream Content Corresponds With Dreamer’s
Psychological Problems and Personality Structure andWith Improvement in Psychotherapy: A Typology ofDream Patterns in Dream Series of Patients inAnalytical Psychotherapy
Christian Roesler
Catholic University of Applied Sciences Freiburg; University of Basel; and KyotoUniversity
This qualitative study of patients’ dreams in analytical psychotherapy using the
method of Structural Dream Analysis investigated 15 cases and 202 dreams. In total,5 major dream patterns were identiﬁed and that accounted for the majority of thedreams. The clients’ dream series were dominated by 1 or 2 repetitive patterns, whichwere closely connected to the psychological problems of the dreamers. In addition,typical changes in the dream series’ patterns could be identiﬁed that correspondedwith therapeutic change. These ﬁndings support Jung’s theory of dreams as providinga holistic image of the dreamer’s psyche including unconscious aspects. Theimplications for different psychoanalytic theories of dreaming and dream interpre-tation are discussed as well as implications for the continuity hypothesis.
Keywords: dreams in psychotherapy, psychoanalytic dream theories, typical dream
patterns, psychotherapy process, continuity hypothesis
In contemporary theories of dreaming, it is widely accepted that dreams
contain meaning that is closely connected with the waking life of the dreamer andthat dream interpretation is helpful as part of psychotherapeutic interventions ( Hill,
1996 ).DeCicco, Donati, and Pini (2012) gave a current overview of studies
investigating the use of dreamwork in psychotherapy for a range of mental healthproblems as well as an overview of different therapeutic methods of dreaminterpretation. Among these is the storytelling method of dream interpretation,which is an example of a newly developed method. Dream interpretation inpsychotherapy originated in psychoanalysis with Freud’s (1900) seminal publica-
tion. In the psychoanalytic tradition, work with dreams has always played an
This article was published Online First November 26, 2018.
Christian Roesler, Department of Clinical Psychology, Catholic University of Applied Sciences
Freiburg; Department of Psychology, University of Basel; and Graduate School of Education, KyotoUniversity.
Correspondence concerning this article should be addressed to Christian Roesler, Department of
Clinical Psychology, Catholic University of Applied Sciences Freiburg, Karlsstraße 63, 79104 Freiburg,Germany. E-mail: christian.roesler@kh-freiburg.deThis document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.
303
Dreaming
© 2018 American Psychological Association 2018, Vol. 28, No. 4, 303–321
1053-0797/18/$12.00 http://dx.doi.org/10.1037/drm0000092

important role in the treatment of psychological disorders, and it is still considered
as the royal road to the unconscious ( Fonagy, Kächele, Leuzinger-Bohleber, &
Taylor, 2012 ;Fosshage, 1987 ). Even though in the different psychoanalytic schools,
quite different approaches to the interpretation of dreams have developed—forexample, C. G. Jung from the beginning had a different perspective on thedream—there is general agreement that dreams give access to an understanding ofthe unconscious roots of psychological problems as well as indicating potentialtherapeutic pathways. The dream can be seen as a subtext that points to theunconscious conﬂicts underlying neurosis, and it also contains constructive indica-tions for the overcoming of problems. The assumption that the dream is mainlyinﬂuenced by unconscious content may be the main characteristic that differenti-ates between psychoanalytic and other contemporary perspectives in psychothera-peutic dreamwork. In the past decades, there has been development in thereconceptualization of psychoanalytic dream theories inﬂuenced by insights fromempirical dream research. This has led to a convergence of contemporary Freudiandream theories moving toward Jung’s understanding of the dream ( Fosshage, 1987 ;
Levin, 1990 ). According to Barrett and McNamara (2007) , the results of empirical
dream research can be summarized in the following way: in the dream, the brain isin a mode where it does not have to process new input but can use larger capacitiesfor working on problems and ﬁnding creative solutions. The dream especiallyfocuses on experiences in waking life that have emotional meaning for the dreamer.The dreaming mind can ﬁnd solutions for problems more readily compared withwaking consciousness because it is able to connect different areas and functions ofthe brain. This supports the view taken by Jung (1971) that sees the psyche as a
self-regulating system and the dream as a spontaneously produced picture of thecurrent situation of the psyche in the form of symbols. Jung differentiates betweena “subjective” level and an “objective” level to dreams. In the ﬁrst perspective, theﬁgures and elements of the dream are interpreted as representing parts or qualitiesof the dreamer’s personality (especially conﬂictual parts, i.e., complexes), whereasin the objective perspective, they are seen as representing persons or entitiesexisting in reality. In dreams, the unconscious psyche attempts to support egoconsciousness and foster a process of personality integration by pointing to parts ofthe psyche not yet integrated into the whole of personality or to indicate unresolvedconﬂicts. Through dreams, the unconscious, because it contains a more holisticknowledge about the development and integration of personality, brings newinformation to consciousness, which can then be integrated if a conscious under-standing of the information is possible. This is the aim of dream interpretation inpsychotherapy. So, Jungian dream interpretation focuses on the relationship of thedream ego (i.e., the ﬁgure in the dream that experiences the dreamer as “myself,”psychoanalytically representing ego consciousness) to the other ﬁgures in thedream. The imagery of this relationship indicates the capability of the ego to copewith emotions, impulses, and complexes (being represented in this symbolic form inthe dream). This capability is called ego strength in psychonalaysis. As theinformation in dreams comes in the form of symbols and images, it needstranslation to be understood by the conscious ego. For this purpose, Jungdeveloped the method of “ampliﬁcation”: the symbolic form is enriched withinformation coming from cultural parallels, the meaning the symbol has in differentcultures, mythologies, religious traditions, and spiritual belief systems. ThroughThis document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.304 ROESLER

such ampliﬁcation, a network of meaning is constructed around the symbol—the
aim is not so much to give a precise interpretation of the symbol but more tostimulate processes in the dreamer to become more conscious of potential solutionsoffered by the dream.
Findings from empirical dream research support this view of the dream. Hall
and Van de Castle (1966) argued that it is possible to draw a personality proﬁle
based only on the dreams of a person. In a study on the dreams of persons withmultiple personality disorder, Barrett (1996) was able to demonstrate that the
split-off parts of their personalities appeared personiﬁed in their dreams. Further-more, there is substantial continuity in the themes in dreams of a person over a longperiod ( Levin, 1990 ). And Cartwright (1977) found that the themes in the dreams
change when a person goes through psychotherapy. Greenberg and Pearlman
(1978) compared the content of dreams of patients currently in psychoanalysis with
the protocols of their therapy sessions that coincided with the time of the dreamand found a strong connection between the themes in the dreams and theirpsychotherapy. The dream could be read as a report about the current conﬂictualthemes in the waking life of the dreamer. Schredl (2008) found a correlation
between the motifs of ﬂying and of falling in dreams and neuroticism scales.Palombo (1982) could show that clients reprocess contents from their last analytical
session in their following dreams. Popp, Luborsky, and Crits-Christoph (1990)
investigated dreams and narratives from therapy sessions using the methodology ofthe Core Conﬂictual Relationship Theme, and they found that both narratives anddreams were structured using the same unconscious relationship patterns.
The Jungian view of dreams could also provide a synthesis for the debate
around continuity versus discontinuity of dream content and waking life experi-ence. As Hobson and Schredl (2011) in their discussion of the continuity hypothesis
pointed out, dreams actually contain elements of waking life on a thematic level,but this does not explain the occurrence of elements in dreams that dreamers havenever experienced in their waking life. As they say, “This raises the intriguingquestion: If dreaming is not entirely derived from waking experience, then just whatis the source of the anomalous content and what is its function?” (p. 3). Hoss (2011) ,
in his commentary on the debate, argues, following Jung, that the distortions ofwaking content are not misrepresentations but are rather the “unconscious aspect”of the waking event expressed in the dream not as a rational thought but as asymbolic image.
It seems that empirical dream research, though not having any intention of
testing Jungian theory, has become quite supportive of Jung’s theory of the dream.Furthermore, contemporary conceptualizations of dreaming based on empiricalresearch strongly question the assumptions in Freud’s classic theory on dreamingand dream interpretation: There is no evidence for a process of distortion that leadsto a difference between manifest and latent meaning and also the dream is not “theguardian of the sleep” and so forth (for an overview, see Fiss, 1995 ). As a result of
this research, some contemporary Freudian dream theories have incorporated anumber of aspects of the Jungian dream theory. An example of this convergencecan be found in the dream theory of Fosshage (1987 ,1997 ), which focuses on the
functions of the dream as a regulator of emotions and integrator of psychologicalorganization. On the other hand, scholars and researchers from the Freudiantradition (even though quoting the empirical evidence speaking against FreudianThis document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.TYPOLOGY OF DREAM PATTERNS IN DREAM SERIES 305

assumptions) still argue for a process of censorship in dreaming—which results in
a distortion of the latent content—and also for the theory of wish fulﬁllment ofdreams. The overall function of dreaming is still supposed to be protecting thesleeper from being alarmed by repressed impulses ( Fisher & Greenberg, 1977 ,1996 ;
Werner & Langenmayr, 2005 ).
So even though there is some evidence supporting psychodynamic theories of
dreaming and the role dreaming can play in psychotherapy, there is a strong needfor more systematic studies on the relationship between the content of dreams of aperson, namely, the development of recurrent themes and ﬁgures in a series ofdreams, and the course of psychotherapy, namely, the development of coreconﬂictual themes of the patient and the overall development of the personality. Italso has to be clariﬁed which of the different psychodynamic models of dreamingand dream interpretation are supported by empirical ﬁndings.
Based on these considerations, this study aims at investigating the following
questions:
Is the content of dreams connected to the psychological situation and
especially to the psychological problems of the dreamer in a systematic way? Andif there is therapeutic change over the course of psychotherapy, is this changeparalleled in the content of the dreams?
Do dreams give a picture of the total situation of the psyche, including
unconscious aspects (Jung), or should dream content be regarded as a distortion ofthe latent (unconscious) meaning that serves the function of wish fulﬁllment(Freud)? If Jung’s perspective is more realistic, we hypothesized that the connec-tion between dream content and the psychological problems of the dreamer wouldbe revealed in the relationship of the dream ego to the other ﬁgures in the dream,and in the extent of the dream ego’s agency, that is, its capability to act, to executewillpower, and to cope with problems in the dream.
Method: Structural Dream Analysis
The usual research approaches investigating the meaning of dream content
make use of coding systems, for example, the well-known coding system of Hall and
Van de Castle (1966) . Also in psychoanalytic dream research, elaborated coding
systems for dream content have been developed and used in studies investigatingthe process of psychotherapy ( Moser & von Zeppelin, 1991 ). In psychoanalytic
research on dreams (for a current overview, see Fonagy et al., 2012 ), there is often
the problem that basic assumptions about the function of dreams are taken forgranted. For example, the Moser and von Zeppelin coding system is based on theassumption that the function of dreaming is to protect sleep and so investigates thechanging positions of elements in the dream that “evidences” this function. But asit is, this coding system is not able to falsify any Freudian assumptions. In our study,we attempted to prevent the research method from implicitly including anytheoretical psychodynamic assumptions about the dream. Consequently, structuraldream analysis (hereafter, SDA) was developed as a method to investigate dreamsfrom a structuralist point of view. The assumption is that the meaning of a dreamconsists not so much in it containing certain symbols or elements but more in therelationship between the elements and in the course of action that the dream takes,This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.306 ROESLER

that is, its structure. The aforementioned coding systems, which count the appear-
ance of certain elements and symbols in dreams, from our point of view, are notable to identify the meaning of dreams, as meaning is the result of interpretation.An example is the famous system built on content analysis of over 50,000 dreamsbyHall and Nordby (1972) . Typical dreams reported in this classiﬁcation involved
aggression, predatory animals, ﬂying, falling, being persecuted by hostile strangers,landscapes, dreams of misfortune, sex, getting married and having children, takingexaminations or undergoing some similar ordeals, traveling, swimming or being inthe water, watching ﬁres, and being conﬁned in an underground place. The problemwith this kind of classiﬁcation, from our point of view, is that these typical dreammotifs describe very different entities, from objects and beings to action patternsand story structures. There is no theoretical model behind such a classiﬁcation thatcould connect the dream motifs with a meaning for the dreamer. This was alreadycriticized by Stevens (1995) , who gave the following example:
Simple content analyses reveal that agonistic dreams are more common among males of all
ages and hedonic dreams more common among females, but both types of dreams occur inboth sexes. A more signiﬁcant variable than gender in determining the relative incidence ofsuch dreams is the kind of family the individual grew up in. (p. 249)
SDA is a qualitative, interpretive research method that attempts to formalize
the process of interpretation of the dream in a way that the conclusions areindependent from the interpreter. In our study, a reliability test found aninterpreter agreement for the results coming from the same case of k/H11005.70–.82.
SDA sees the dream as a narrative. In narratology, a narrative is deﬁned as adevelopment from a starting point, which often is a problem that needs repair orsolution. The narrative goes through ups and downs leading to the solution of the
problem or a valued end point to the story ( Gülich & Quasthoff, 1985 ). Similarly,
the dream is a short story about how the protagonist, in most cases the dream ego,processes a problem. SDA thus makes use of analytic tools developed in narratol-ogy. Two earlier methods of narrative analysis were incorporated: (a) VladimirPropp’s (1975) structuralist method of functional analysis used to investigate the
structure of fairy tales. Each fairytale is divided into its functional parts (e.g., “TheKing is ill and needs healing”; “The hero ﬁghts the Dragon”), and each functionalpart receives an abstract symbol, for example, a letter or number. As a result, eachfairytale can be written as an abstract formula of symbols and then differentfairytales can be compared regarding their structure. (b) Boothe’s (2002) narrato-
logical method JAKOB used in analytical psychotherapies for the analysis ofpatient narratives and their development over the course of the psychotherapy.This method focuses on the role the narrator takes in the narrative in terms ofactivity versus passivity and his or her relation to other protagonists in thenarrative, as well as on different episodic models that describe the course thenarrative takes. The meaning of symbols in the dreams we investigated wasanalyzed by a systematized form of ampliﬁcation. In psychotherapy, the analystassumes that the series of dreams presented by the analysand follows an innerstructure of meaning. SDA aims at identifying this inner structure of meaning fromthe series of dreams alone without referring to additional information about thedreamer, their psychodynamics, or the course of psychotherapy. The meaningconveyed by the dream is analyzed in a systematic series of interpretive steps forThis document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.TYPOLOGY OF DREAM PATTERNS IN DREAM SERIES 307

which a formalized manual is available (for more details, see Roesler, in press ). The
interpreters, who have no information about the dreamer, are given a series of 10 to 20dreams covering the whole course of the psychotherapy and that ideally mark the corepoints and topics of it. The dreams are provided by practicing analysts who also writea case report about the psychopathology and psychodynamics of the patient involvedas well as about the development of core conﬂicts and themes in the course of thetherapy. Only when the dream series are completely analyzed using SDA are theresults compared with the reports by the therapists. This method is currently beingapplied by research teams in the United States, Germany, Switzerland, and Japan withthe aim of building a larger corpus of cases so as to formulate an empirically foundedtheory of dreams and their meaning in psychotherapy.
Participants
The current study is based on a sample of 15 cases and 202 dreams (see Table
1). All cases were treated by analytical psychotherapists. Cases 1 to 11 were
provided by members of the German Association of Jungian Analysts, and Cases12 to 15 were provided by members of the Association of Jungian Analysts ofJapan. The therapists provided the text of the dreams as well as a report includingbiographical data about their patient, psychopathology and diagnosis, psychody-
Table 1
Description of All Cases and Number of Dreams
Case Sex Age Diagnosis N
1 F 16–19 Anxiety, depression, narcissistic personality, aggression
inhibition, identity problem13
2 M 29–34 Ejaculatio praecox, decision problems, test anxiety 17
3 F 37 Depression, narcissistic personality, obsessive-
compulsive, female identity problems5
4 M 18 Obsessive-compulsive, migraine, aggressive impulses 11
5 F 47–50 Hysterical neurosis, narcissistic personality 106 M 32–38 Depression, traumatization, aggressiveness, sexual obses-
sions, antisocial behavior11
7 F 28–29 Adjustment disorder, depressive and anxiety symptoms,
alcohol abuse9
8 F 52–56 Depression, narcissistic personality, infantile
traumatization/abandonment13
9 F 35–39 Depression, low self-esteem, obsessive-compulsive, psy-
chosomatic symptoms30
10 F 18–20 Depression, narcissistic personality, aggression inhibition,
test anxiety, psychosomatic8
11 M 18 Depression, test anxiety, school refusal, aggressive im-
pulses13
12 M 18 School refusal, aggressive impulses 19
13 F 20 Narcissistic personality, female identity problems, marital
problems, (anorexia)10
14 F 28–30 Social phobia, nausea, marital problems 19
15 F 18 Insomnia, dissociation, self-injuries, relationship prob-
lems14
Note. F/H11005female; M /H11005male.This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.308 ROESLER

namic considerations, and a summary of the development of the patient and their
improvement over the course of therapy.
Case Example (Case 6): Dreams
I walked down the street in the darkness, on both sides small houses behind fences. Lots of
barking dogs jumped against the fences. I was frightened but then I became brave. I barkedlike a dog myself aggressively and the dogs immediately fell silent.
I am on my way with my bicycle up a hill. It is demanding. Around me are large trees, it’s
like in the mountains. Arriving on top there is a little white poodle, it barks, it is on a leash.I’m driving home downhill in sharp curves. Doberman dogs are behind me, I cannot get ridof them because of the curves. They run at my side and bark at me. Then it is light and sunny,arriving on the pass it’s beautiful. There is a restaurant, like in Italy, beautiful houses. On topof the pass the black dogs are coming.
There is a stillwater, a river? There is a little bridge, somebody on the other side. He falls into
the water, he somehow slipped as if under a log. I pull him out, but ﬁrst I hesitate. He is likedead. But that guy has a sharp knife and he cuts the other helper’s throat. I ﬂee.
In black and white: at a nearby train station. A girl and another person, who seems to be
masochistic, and a very energetic black dog. The dog pulls the other person into the littlepond, then pulls the person out of the water and up the hill. The person gives himself a blowjob, then to the dog. Then I am at the foot of a tall building. I say: the dog must be put ona leash. The masochistic person says: you have to stroke the dog. I say: no, it must be put ona leash and then removed. The masochistic person is angry and goes into the tall building.The other person says: you have to follow him, he is sad. The dog smells, I put him on a leashbut it is disgusting.
An elderly, badly smelling dog is with me and my girlfriend in Paris. It just found us. We get
on the bus, the badly smelling dog could not go with us, we left it outside. We are alreadyoutside of the city limits, but will return to the city on the highway. The dog would not havebeen able to come along behind us.
I was the manager of a café in the house. I was promoted like Joseph in the house of Potifar.
Everybody says goodbye to a father with his little son, he’s in the backyard. There is anelderly man with a Pitbull. He says: I can show you how evil the dog is. But I just had to go.I walked into a vineyard. The dog runs from its leash and goes behind me, but I jump overfences and walls. The path goes uphill through the yard and back down on the other side.
(about two Romanian criminals)A little baby is in danger. I cover it with newspaper and carry it with me through a sewerage
system. Then I forget about it and leave it somewhere. But then I realize that the baby ismissing and go back and ﬁnd it again. I carry it with me and feed it. I think: the baby is sosmall, it should get mother’s milk, but I can just feed him solid food.
(drinking beer with my father)My father dies at the age of 49 years.I saw a giant toe and found it is my toe. The skin on the nail was grown very wide. I thought:
this has to be removed. It could be moved back easily. There was another level of skin below,this one could be taken off easily, too. I was surprised that it did not hurt. Below the skinwere very small black worms, everything was rotten, but you could remove it withoutdifﬁculty. Below that everything was new.This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.TYPOLOGY OF DREAM PATTERNS IN DREAM SERIES 309

Case Report (Delivered by the Analyst)
The client was imprisoned having committed physical violence in more than 100 cases. Being
not openly violent any more after imprisonment he suffered from a severe depression. Theonly means to deal with these depressive states was a strong compulsion to consumepornographic media containing physical violence toward women. The client’s father sufferedfrom severe alcoholism, was violent against his wife and children and several times almostkilled the client. The father also seems to have been suffering from a sexual obsession: hecollected pornographic videos in large numbers and stored them in his bedroom, which wasfascinating for the client. In adolescence the client was taken out of his family by the welfareauthorities because of the difﬁcult situation and was given into custody. Later he joined agroup of hooligans and committed a large number of violent crimes. In prison the clientexperienced a religious conversion and became member of a fundamentalist Christian sect.His intimate relationships often followed a sado-masochistic pattern. The client experiencedsevere abandonment, helplessness and anxiety in childhood leading to compensatoryaggression and a severe depression based on a narcissistic disorder; violent contact withwomen serves as a defense against depression. The religious conversion has equipped theclient with a strong superego which helps him to control himself in social life, neverthelessthis does not solve the inner conﬂicts. There is a very strong and violent destructive complexin the psyche which formerly was dealt with by directing it outward to other people, now itgoes up against the ego. In the ﬁrst years of therapy the focus was on helping the client toformulate his needs and feelings and communicate them in social relationships, which helpedto decrease the pressure of frustration aggression. The experience of safety in the therapeuticrelationship which also included a certain control over the analyst helped to integrate these
experiences and strengthen ego functions. In the course of therapy the relationships withwomen changed and the client became capable of building a marriage and family. When hisﬁrst son was born the client experienced such panic that he felt aggressive impulses towardthe infant. By working through these impulses and their connection to early experiences inlife, the inner pressure of frustration and aggression slowly receded. At the end of therapythe client was living in a very solid social, family and job situation. The low-frequencytherapy took six years with two minor interruptions and 206 hours.
Results
A major ﬁnding is that a high percentage of all dreams from all cases can be
categorized by a very limited number of structural patterns. The most general
pattern can be described as: the ego is confronted with a requirement, has to cope
with a challenge, and has to fulﬁll a plan or task . This general pattern can be
differentiated into ﬁve more speciﬁc patterns regarding the extent of agency of thedream ego.
Whereas in Pattern 1, there is no ego present at all, in Patterns 2 and 3, the
dream ego is present but under pressure from other forces in the dream and theinitiative is not with the ego but with others. The ego is subjected to their activity,power, and control. In Patterns 4 and 5, the ego has taken over the initiative andattempts to follow a personal plan but may be confronted with difﬁculties. InPattern 5, this activity focuses on a social relationship.
Pattern 1: No Dream Ego Present
In the dream, there is no dream ego present, the dreamer just observes a scene
as if watching a movie and does not actively take part in the dream. In some cases,the dream ego ﬂies above and looks down on a scene or happenings in the dream.This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.310 ROESLER

Pattern 2: The Dream Ego Is Threatened
In dreams of this kind, the dream ego is threatened, for example, attacked or
injured and usually tries to escape or protect itself against the threatening ﬁgures.In b) to d) below, the dream ego very often reacts with panic and either feelspowerless or tries to escape from the threat. Often this results in the dream egobeing chased by the threatening ﬁgures. The dreams in this pattern can bedifferentiated depending on the severity of the threat.
a) The dream ego is damaged, for example, severely wounded, or even killed.
In some cases, the killing has already happened and the dream ego isfound as a dead body.
b) The threat to the dream ego comes from a force in nature, for example, a
natural disaster, earthquake, ﬁre, ﬂooding, storm, and so forth.
c) The dream ego is threatened by (dangerous) animals.d) The dream ego is threatened by human beings, for example, criminals,
murderers, or “evil people,” or human-like ﬁgures, for example, ghosts,shadows, and so forth.
Pattern 3: The Dream Ego Is Confronted With a Performance Requirement
The dream ego is confronted with a performance requirement, which is set by
another ﬁgure or agency in the dream. The dream ego is confronted with a task thatit has to fulﬁll or is required to ﬁnd something or to give something to anotherperson in the dream so that they can fulﬁll a task and so forth. The most commonform of this pattern is the examination dream. An important part of this pattern isthat the initiative is not with the dream ego but with other ﬁgures confronting thedream ego with a requirement. The dream ego is subjected to their control andpower.
a) Examination in a school or university setting.b) The dream ego is subject to an inspection by an ofﬁcial person, for
example, a ticket inspection on the train where the right of the dream egois questioned.
c) The dream ego has the task to ﬁnd something (which was lost before), get
something, produce something, and so forth.
A very typical pattern in these kind of dreams is that the dream ego does not
feel capable of performing the task, does not possess the right tools or capabilities,or has failed to bring these devices, has lost them on the way, and so forth. Forexample, the dream ego is not prepared for the examination, or arrives too late forit.This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.TYPOLOGY OF DREAM PATTERNS IN DREAM SERIES 311

Pattern 4: Mobility Dream
The dream ego is moving toward a speciﬁed or unclear destination, for
example, traveling and making use of different forms of transportation like bicycle,car, bus, train, airplane, ship, and so forth. An interesting differentiation is thequestion whether these transportation devices are public or individual. Again thisform of dream can be differentiated depending on the extent of the dream ego’sagency, which shows in the extent to which the dream ego determines its ownmovement.
a) Disorientation: The dream ego has no idea where to go, even where it is,
and there are no signs of direction and so forth.
b) The dream ego is locked up in a closed space, imprisoned, and so forth,
and is looking for a way to get out.
c) The dream ego wants to move, travel, and so forth but has no means to do
so, for example, it misses the train.
d) The dream ego attempts to move and has some means of transportation
but cannot control the movement, for example, it cannot steer a car.
e) The dream ego is moving but the way is blocked or the means of transport
breaks down or crashes and movement cannot be continued.
f) The dream ego is moving, making use of some means of transportation, but
it is going the wrong way, is in the wrong train or bus, or is not authorizedto use it (e.g., has no ticket) and therefore cannot continue the journey.
g) In the positive form, the dream ego succeeds in moving toward and
reaching the desired destination.
Pattern 5: Social Interaction Dream
The dream ego is occupied with making contact or communicating with
another person or ﬁgure in the dream. The dream ego wants to get in contact withanother person, or is in communication and attempts to communicate something tothe other person, or is more generally occupied with creating a desired contact withthe other person, which can include sexual contact. This dream pattern can bedifferentiated depending on the dream ego’s activity and how successful it is inreaching its desired contact.
a) The dream ego wants to get into contact but is ignored by others.b) The dream ego is criticized, devalued, or made ridiculous by others and
feels shame.
c) The dream ego is successful in creating the desired contact.d) A special case: The dream ego is aggressive toward others (even killsThis document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.312 ROESLER

others), which expresses the will of the dream ego to be separated and
autonomous.
Only six dreams out of the 202 in this sample could not be categorized into one
of the abovementioned patterns. Pattern 2 (the dream ego is threatened) was thepattern most often found in the sample (42%), followed by Pattern 4 (mobility;28.7%), Pattern 5 (social interaction; 19.8%), and Pattern 3 (performance require-ment; 10.4%). The total is higher than 100%, as some dreams include two patterns.Pattern 1 with no dream ego was found in only two cases (11 and 12).
Patterns of change in the structure of dreams over the course of therapy. In
this study, we not only found typical patterns in the structure of the dreams but alsoacross the whole series of dreams. A general ﬁnding was that in those cases in whichthe psychotherapeutic intervention was successful such that there was an improve-ment in symptoms, psychological well-being, and regulation of emotion and, froma psychoanalytic point of view, a gain in psychological structure and ego strength,we found a typical pattern of transformation in the structure of the dreams.Typically the ﬁrst half of the psychotherapeutic process was dominated by arepetitive pattern in the dreams, which was connected with the psychologicalproblems of the dreamer, in the sense as described earlier. Generally, in the middleof the dream series, there appears a dream or dream symbol that marks a changein the pattern (see more details mentioned later). The second half of the dreamseries is then typically characterized by a change in the repetitive pattern.
In Pattern 2 (the dream ego is threatened), the dream ego changes its reaction
to the threat. Instead of escaping, it confronts the threatening ﬁgures, ﬁghtsactively, ﬁnds constructive strategies to cope with the threat, and toward the end ofthe dream series succeeds in overcoming the threat. Example: In Case 7, the dreamego in the ﬁrst half of the series is threatened by water in the form of giant waves,ﬂooding, and so forth and usually drowns in the ﬂood. In the second half of theseries, however, the dream ego more and more succeeds in moving to a safe placeon dry land. Furthermore, a transformative pattern emerges in which the dream egorealizes that the seemingly threatening ﬁgures are not as dangerous and even makesfriends with these ﬁgures. Typical examples of the second transformative patternare seen in Cases 5 and 6: in Case 5, in the ﬁrst half of the series, the dream ego isthreatened by snakes. Then, in the midst of the dream series, a golden snakeappears, which is not dangerous. In the next dream, the threatening ﬁgure changesinto a salamander, then into a dark man. In Case 6 (see earlier case example), the
dream ego in the ﬁrst half of the series is chased by dogs and tries to escape, thenin the midst of the series, there appear helpless and wounded dogs that need thedream ego’s support but the dream ego reacts with disgust. Finally, the dream egoﬁnds a helpless baby who needs care and support. To summarize, in the dreamseries dominated by Pattern 2, the threatening ﬁgures tend to change from naturaldisasters or threatening wild animals to less dangerous animals and then into human
beings. This transformative pattern can be found in nine of the 15 cases in this study(Cases 1, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 12, 14, and 15). A similar pattern of transformation in the seriesof dreams can be found for those cases that are dominated by Patterns 3 and 4.
In Pattern 3 (performance requirement), the ﬁrst half of the series is typically
dominated by the dream ego failing to fulﬁll the required task. This is seen in Cases1, 2, 8, and 10, where the dream ego repeatedly is confronted with an examination,This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.TYPOLOGY OF DREAM PATTERNS IN DREAM SERIES 313

is not prepared, is too late, or even forgets about the examination, thereby fails and
escapes and so forth. Change in this pattern is characterized typically by thedisappearance of examination dreams in the second half of the series.
In Pattern 4 (mobility), typically in the ﬁrst half of the series, the dream ego is
not able to reach the desired aim, is on the wrong bus or train or has no ticket andso forth, the road is blocked, or the dream ego is not capable of controlling the car.In some cases, the dream ego is even walled-in and not able to escape. In the secondhalf of the series, this typically changes into the dream ego succeeding in reachingthe desired aim and controlling the means of transportation. This applies in Cases1, 4, 8, 9, 11, and 13.
In Pattern 5 (social interaction), the cases dominated by this pattern usually are
characterized by failed attempts (or passivity) of the dream ego to get into a desiredcontact or communication with others in the ﬁrst half of the series—the dream egois ignored by others, others forget about the ego’s birthday, or the dream ego iseven criticized and devalued by others. Toward the end of the dream series, thedream ego is more and more capable of creating satisfying interactions with othersor it experiences care and support from others (as seen in Cases 9, 10, 11, 12, and13). In those cases with successful therapeutic change, the second half of theirdream series is dominated more and more by Pattern 5, that is, the dream egobecomes occupied with creating a desired social interaction. And this occurs afterthe dream ego has succeeded in overcoming a repetitive negative pattern of beingthreatened or having failed mobility or negative examination dreams.
These transformative patterns were only found in cases where the therapists
reported improvement on the symptom level as well as positive changes inpersonality structure. By contrast, there are two cases (2 and 3) in the sample wherethe therapists delivered dream series to the researchers even though the therapywas not yet completed (and this information was not given to the interpreters). Inthese cases also, repetitive patterns can be found but with no change in therepetitive pattern in the way described earlier: for example, in Case 2, the dreamego in most of the dreams is in a movement, usually by public transport but failsagain and again to reach the desired aim because has no ticket, or the train or trambreaks down, and so forth.
These transformative patterns in the dream series are interpreted from a
psychodynamic perspective and are seen as speaking to the fact that an initiallyweak ego structure that fails to regulate and integrate threatening emotions,impulses, and complexes gains in ego strength over the course of the therapy andmore and more succeeds in coping with initially suppressed or split-off parts of thepsyche and integrating these into constructive interactions with others. As a resultof such gains in ego strength, the dream ego is capable more and more to executewillpower, conduct its plans, reach aims, and express its needs in social interactions.This interpretation is supported by the ﬁndings from the two cases where there isno therapeutic change and where there is also no transformation of the repetitivedream pattern.
Dream patterns and symbols are connected with psychological problems of the
dreamer. As a result of our study, we not only found a clear correlation between
therapeutic change and a transformation of patterns in the dream series, but thereis also a clear connection between the patterns that dominate the dream series (orat least the ﬁrst half of the series), on the one hand, and the psychological problemsThis document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.314 ROESLER

and the personality structure of the dreamer, on the other hand. The ﬁve patterns
can be interpreted psychologically as imaging the capacity of the ego to cope withand/or control emotions, motivations, and complexes (as unintegrated parts of thepsyche). The extent of agency of the dream ego is equivalent to that which inpsychoanalysis is called ego strength or maturity of the personality, that is, thedegree of integration of the ego and other parts of the psyche into the whole of thepersonality, thus enabling positive ego functioning.
There is only one case (12) in the sample in which Pattern 1 (no dream ego
present) is found in its full form. In the ﬁrst ﬁve dreams of the series, this dreamerjust observes a scene as if watching a movie. This case is a Japanese male student,18 years of age, who was treated because of severe school refusal over several years.The patient had retreated into total passivity and several attempts of psycho-therapy, including an inpatient setting, had failed to change the situation. Thisstoryline in his dreams can be interpreted as an imaging of a deeply regressedpersonality structure and lack of a clear identity, where ego strength is at a very lowlevel. There is an interesting parallel to another case (11), again a male student 18years of age with the diagnosis of school refusal and where ego strength and identitystructure are at a comparably low level as in Case 12. In this latter case, in severalof his dreams, there is a dream ego but it is hovering above the actual happeningsin the dream and does not participate or be active in any way.
Pattern 2 (the dream ego is threatened) is found in those cases diagnosed with
a narcissistic disorder connected with a very weak ego structure, where there is anunclear personal identity or blocked identity development and low self-esteem.Often such patients have developed a compensatory “false self” while splitting offunaccepted parts of their psyche. Dream images of an injury or damage to thedream ego, the dream ego being murdered, or the dream ego found as a deadcorpse seem to be connected on the psychological level with more severe cases oflow self-esteem, a “narcissistic wound,” or even traumatization. From a psychody-namic point of view, such motifs in the dreams can be interpreted as a weak egostruggling with overwhelming forces derived from split-off emotions, impulses, andcomplexes, as well as devaluing introjects that continually threaten the functioningof ego consciousness. Development in psychotherapy—and in the dreams—ischaracterized by a growth in ego strength, which becomes more and more capableof coping with the threatening parts of the psyche and accepting them as an integralpart of the personality. Pattern 3, especially examination dreams, and Pattern 4,where the dream ego attempts to move in a desired direction, are found to occur inthose cases with a more stable ego structure (as diagnosed by the therapist) butwhere the patient has problems with making decisions and taking progressive stepsin life, such as completing exams and deciding on a professional career.
Pattern 5, where the dream ego is involved in social interactions, characterizes
those cases where a stable ego is diagnosed by the therapist but where the patientstruggles with neurotic problems around interpersonal relationships, such as ﬁndingan intimate partner and creating a satisfying intimate and erotic relationship. Thispattern can be interpreted as imaging a more mature personality structure, whichis not so much struggling for integrity of the ego but rather more with interpersonalrelationships. This interpretation is supported by the ﬁnding that in positivelydeveloping psychotherapies/dream series, often a repetitive pattern on a lower levelis overcome and replaced by dreams following Pattern 5 in the second half of theThis document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.TYPOLOGY OF DREAM PATTERNS IN DREAM SERIES 315

therapy. It is also found in a number of cases that a dominating symbol which
appears repeatedly as part of a repetitive pattern, e.g., the dream ego beingthreatened by ﬁgures symbolized as dogs, the symbol is strongly connected with thepsychological situation or problem of the dreamer. In Case 5, the female dreameris repeatedly threatened by snakes. In this case, the therapist diagnosed a strongtension in the personality between a very moralistic superego, on the one hand, andvery lively erotic and sexual desires, on the other hand. The snake can clearly beinterpreted as a sexual, phallic symbol, which appears threatening to an ego underthe pressure of the moralistic superego. But there is also clear evidence from thedreams in this study that the meaning of a symbol can be totally different in othercases; for example, the snake in Case 8 has the role of a helper. In the case example(Case 6) described earlier, the threatening dogs are symbolically summarizing theunresolved problems of the dreamer around violence, sadism, sexual obsessions,and a deeply wounded self-esteem. In summary, symbols appearing repeatedly indream series can often be interpreted as symbolic images for parts of the psyche(e.g. unmet needs or aggressive impulses), that are not yet integrated into the wholeof the personality. That is the reason why they are experienced as threatening to theego.
Transformative dreams: dream patterns and symbols connected with thera-
peutic change. In those cases that were considered as successful therapies from
the viewpoint of the therapist, that is, with improvement or even fundamentalchanges in the personality structure of the patient, certain changes in the dreamstories coincided with positive shifts in the therapy. Usually such transformativedreams were found in the middle of the dream series following a series of dreamswith a repetitive pattern, for example, threat and escape imagery that was notcontinued after the transformative dream. These transformative dreams stand out,they show a great variety of images and structures, and they are usually experiencedwith positive emotions in the dreamer. The data in this study do not allow for anyfurther interpretation of these dreams and more cases would be necessary todevelop any theory of such transformative patterns. Nevertheless, a similar motifwas found in six of the 12 cases who had transformative dreams: a baby or youngchild, who needed help and support, played a major role in these dreams. Thedream ego was asked to care for and give support to the child but had initialdifﬁculties in turning toward and taking appropriate care of the child (see earliercase example). This motif is interesting insofar as Jung pointed out that thearchetype of the child is connected with transformation in psychotherapeuticprocesses ( Jung, 1981 ), and further, a number of models of psychotherapy focus on
supporting the patient to turn toward and take care of his or her “inner woundedchild.” Other motifs in these transformative dreams included the appearance ofhelpers who support the dream ego in coping with threatening ﬁgures, the dreamego succeeding in working its way through narrow tubes or tunnels, and the dreamego celebrating freedom with a dance. In two cases (5 and 6), a similar pattern wasfound in the transformation of the threat—escape pattern. An initial change wasmarked by the dream ego not experiencing any further fear but rather disgust,which turned into an attitude of caring for the formerly threatening ﬁgures (seeearlier case example).This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.316 ROESLER

Discussion
The results of this study indicate a strong correlation between dream content
and repetitive patterns in dream series, on the one hand, and the dreamer’spersonality structure and psychological problems, on the other hand. In addition,changes in the course of psychotherapy are paralleled by a transformation in thedream patterns of the patient. It can be purported that information carried by thedream about the psychological situation of the dreamer is not only reﬂected in staticsymbols or content but also in patterns of the relationship of the dream ego to otherﬁgures in the dream.
Based on these ﬁndings, a psychological interpretation of the dream patterns
and the patterns of transformation over the course of psychotherapy is possible.The ﬁve patterns detected can be interpreted psychologically as an expression ofthe capacity of the dreamer’s ego, on different levels, to cope with and/or controlemotions, motivations, and complexes (as unintegrated parts of the psyche). Theextent of agency of the dream ego is equivalent to that which psychoanalysis callsego strength or maturity of the personality as well as the degree of integration ofego and other parts of the psyche into the whole of the personality and the capacityof ego functioning.
Those dreams in which no dream ego is present are only found in cases with a
very low level of ego strength and personality integration (and only in the initialphase of psychotherapy). Usually the patient has regressed into a state of deeppassivity. Pattern 1 exempliﬁes this extreme state of low agency of the ego.Japanese colleagues involved in the international SDA research project report agrowing number of cases with such phenomena in their practices, mostly studentswith the problem of school refusal ( Tanaka, 2014 ). Often in these cases, high-
functioning autistic spectrum disorder is diagnosed. So, the lack of an active dreamego in their dreams is equivalent to a lack of personality structure and a low levelof ego functioning in the life of these patients.
Similarly, the different shapes of Pattern 2 can be seen to parallel the level of
integrity and maturity of the ego and the stability of its boundaries. This pattern ofthreat and escape is often found in dreams in the ﬁrst half of the psychotherapyprocess and can be interpreted as the ego being still too weak to be able to confrontwith or regulate some parts of the personality or certain emotions and motivations,for example, aggressive impulses that become threatening to ego integrity. Changethrough the psychotherapeutic process is marked in the dreams by the dream egobecoming more capable of confronting the threatening ﬁgures. Consequently, thethreat is often diminished and the threatening ﬁgures are often surprisinglyidentiﬁed as not being really dangerous. Dreams of Pattern 3, in which the dreamego is forced by others to fulﬁll a task and/or is controlled by others and so forth,can be seen as an image of a psychological situation in which the ego has establisheda certain integrity with boundaries but is still too weak to take an active part ininteraction with the superego and its requirements.
As a result of a growth in ego strength and a higher integration of ego,
superego, and other parts of the psyche in the course of therapy, the pattern of thedreams shifts to Patterns 4 and 5, where the ego becomes more active in the dreamas well as in real life. The patient can cope with problems and is more capable offollowing individual plans and shaping interpersonal relationships. On the otherThis document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.TYPOLOGY OF DREAM PATTERNS IN DREAM SERIES 317

hand, patients whose dreams from the beginning of the series can be categorized as
mainly following Patterns 4 and 5 usually have more mature personalities with clearboundaries and a higher level of ego strength. The initial difﬁculties bringing thesepatients into psychotherapy usually circle around the struggle to create desirableinterpersonal relationships rather than to stabilize a weak ego and a fragmentedpersonality or to regulate extremely low self-esteem. With regard to the psycho-logical level in Pattern 4 (mobility dreams), there is a deﬁned activity of the ego thathas an aim and that uses energy to move toward it. This can be understood as amoderate level of ego strength that allows for the execution of willpower. In dreamseries, very often the ﬁrst half of the psychotherapy process is characterized byfailed attempts of the dream ego to reach the desired aim (a to f), whereas in thesecond half of the process, the growing integrity and strength of ego functioning issymbolized by successful mobility dreams (g).
Pattern 5 dreams picture interactions of the dream ego with others who either
appear as a group of others representing the generalized other or are characterizedas real persons in the social life of the dreamer (in psychoanalytical terms: objectrelations). Again, in the ﬁrst half of the dream series, the dream ego’s attempts tocreate desirable relationships are usually failing—the dream ego is ignored or feelsshame. However, through successful psychotherapy processes, the dream egosucceeds more and more in actively shaping its relationships with others.
As a result of our ﬁndings, we would form this hypothesis: the relationship
between the dream ego and threatening ﬁgures and the reaction of the dream egoto the threat is imaging the relationship between actual ego strength and uninte-grated or conﬂicted parts of the psyche, unconscious and repressed needs,motivations, and complexes. The special form the threatening ﬁgure takes in thedream can be seen as symbolizing the psychological problem, the complex, orrepressed impulse with which the dreamer is struggling, especially if the dreampattern is repetitive. Patients whose dreams are shaped mainly by the threat–es-cape pattern usually struggle with structural problems around an unstable ego andpersonality with unclear boundaries (at least in the ﬁrst half of the psychotherapyprocess), whereas patients with dreams of mobility and interpersonal relationshipsseem to have more integrated personalities and higher ego strength and arepreoccupied with more neurotic and interpersonal problems. We would alsohypothesize that there is a change in dream patterns over the course of successfultherapies. Dreams move from Patterns 1 and 2 in the ﬁrst half of a successfultherapy process, where there are failed attempts by the dream ego to move andcreate relationships in a desirable way, to Patterns 4 and 5, where successfulactivities and control by the dream ego are seen.
The above have to be seen as hypotheses given the small sample size in this
study. Nevertheless, the patterns found in this study can form the basis for futureresearch.
The fact that there is a strong correspondence between agency of the dream
ego and ego strength in waking life somehow parallels the ﬁndings of Sándor,
Szakadát, and Bódizs (2016) , who found that the dreamer’s presence in their
dreams, manifested in activities, interactions, self-effectiveness, willful effort, andso forth, is correlated with more effective executive control in waking life and thesubject’s capacities for emotional processing. In addition, in parallel with theﬁndings in this study, Ellis (2016) found typical changes in dreams of traumaThis document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.318 ROESLER

survivors with repetitive posttraumatic stress disorder nightmares as a result of
treatment using focusing-oriented dreamwork. As he says, “Dream ego actionsmoved forward on a continuum from freeze to ﬂight to ﬁght as dreamers began toﬁnd their voices, seek help and/or take action” (p. 185).
The ﬁndings of this study also support the hypothesis that dreams can be
understood as an image of the current situation of the dreamer’s psyche as a whole,including aspects and processes that are unconscious and not accessible to wakinglife consciousness. The ﬁndings of this study show no evidence of a psychologicalprocess of censorship in the sense of Freud’s concept, which purportedly distortslatent dream content into manifest content. Even though psychological problemsand the state of ego integrity of the dreamer were symbolized in the dreams in theform of images as well as in the form of patterns, no distortion could be found.Instead, the manifest content of the dream was clearly picturing the psychologicalsituation of the dreamer, in most cases even dramatically. Our ﬁndings also refutethe hypothesis of wish fulﬁllment of dreams. Instead, most of the dreams, especiallyin the ﬁrst half of the psychotherapy process, were putting the strongest fears of thedreamer into clear images. In general, the ﬁrst half of the dream series in parallelwith the ﬁrst half of the psychotherapy process were clearly picturing the failingattempts of the ego to reach its goals and create satisfying life conditions andrelationships. In particular, dream series with repetitive motifs of threat and escape,failing examinations, and blocked mobility left the dreamers with very unpleasantfeelings of frustration, fear, and shame. It also has to be questioned whether thecontent of the dream, when interpreted, reveals sexual desires and sexual relation-ships in each case. There are indeed cases in which the dreams take up sexualtopics, either directly in the form of Pattern 5 (social interactions) or by symbolizingsexual desires (e.g., Case 5: snakes), but this parallels the problems of the dreamers,which were also explicit themes in the psychotherapeutic processes of thesepatients. The majority of the patients in this study were struggling with problemsthat did not focus on sexual desires or sexual relationships. Therefore, the processesof symbolization actually found in this study covered a wide variety of psychologicalthemes, and again, the symbols were not hiding the unconscious issue but insteadpresented a clear and often drastic image of the dreamer’s psychological problem.
Insofar as the extent of ego functioning and the psychological problems of the
dreamers are mirrored in the dream patterns and symbols, these ﬁndings supportthe continuity hypothesis of dreaming and waking life. Our ﬁndings stronglysupport the position taken by Domhoff (2017) who pointed out that continuity does
not mean a correspondence between dreams and banal events of the day. Rather,the intensity of personal concerns and interests shape dream content, and “inparticular, the frequency of characters or activities reveals the intensity of variousconcerns” ( Domhoff, 2017 , p. 14). From our point of view, it has to be added that
the dream images include unconscious aspects of the waking life of the dreamer.This aligns with the view on dreams taken by Jung, who sees the dream ascompensating an attitude of consciousness by presenting a more holistic picture ofthe total situation of the psyche, including unconscious aspects.
It has to be noted that there are limitations to the design and the results of this
study. The ﬁrst limitation is the small sample size, which was owing to the fact thatthe application of SDA in the initial cases was very time-consuming. Now, afterhaving identiﬁed structural patterns to be found in a number of dreams and cases,This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.TYPOLOGY OF DREAM PATTERNS IN DREAM SERIES 319

an accelerated version of SDA can be developed that will focus on a quick
identiﬁcation of the patterns. So, future studies should focus on testing thehypotheses formulated earlier. A second limitation lies in the very unsystematicreports delivered by the analysts providing the cases. For future studies, a moresystematic form of case reporting should be developed and analysts providing casesshould be asked to apply this form for delivering their information on the case.Furthermore, standardized measures should be used on the cases to add to theanalyst’s case information, thus providing objective data about the severity of thepatient’s symptoms as well as about the degree of improvement over the course oftherapy. An international research project has just been started in Germany andSwitzerland that attempts to gather this form of data. However, as analyticalpsychotherapies are usually long-term psychotherapies, it will take a number ofyears before these data will be available. It also has to be pointed out that SDA byhaving the explicit aim of identifying the core structure of the dream leads to astrong reduction of the initial variety, richness, and colorfulness of dream images.SDA does not claim to be able to interpret any aspect or element of a dream. Eventhough this study was able to identify general patterns in the dreams, a number ofdreams in this sample could not be categorized and their meaning in the context ofthe case and the series remains unclear. This also applies to a number of thesymbols and elements in the categorized dreams. So even though the study couldidentify some aspects of the meaning of dreams in psychotherapy, other aspectsremain mysterious.
References
Barrett, D. (1996). Dreams in multiple personality. In D. Barrett (Ed.), Trauma and dreams (pp. 37–52).
Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
Barrett, D., & McNamara, P. (Eds.). (2007). The new science of dreaming: Vol. 2 .Content, recall and
personality correlates . Westport, CT: Praeger.
Boothe, B. (2002). Kodiermanual zur Erzählanalyse JAKOB. Berichte aus der Klinische Psychologie, Nr.
52. Switzerland: Universität Zürich, Psychologisches Institut.
Cartwright, R. D. (1977). Night life . Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice Hall.
DeCicco, T. L., Donati, D., & Pini, M. (2012). Examining dream content and meaning of dreams with
English and Italian versions of the storytelling method of dream interpretation. International
Journal of Dream Research, 5, 68–75.
Domhoff, G. W. (2000). Methods and measures for the study of dream content. In M. Kryger, T. Roth,
& W. Dement (Eds.), Principles and practices of sleep medicine (Vol. 3, pp. 463–471). Philadelphia,
PA: W. B. Saunders.
Domhoff, G. W. (2017). The invasion of the concept snatchers: The origins, distortions, and future of the
continuity hypothesis. Dreaming, 27, 14–39. http://dx.doi.org/10.1037/drm0000047
Ellis, L. A. (2016). Qualitative changes in recurrent PTSD nightmares after focusing-oriented dream-
work. Dreaming, 26, 185–201. http://dx.doi.org/10.1037/drm0000031
Fisher, S., & Greenberg, R. P. (1977). The scientiﬁc credibility of Freud’s theories and therapy . Hassocks,
United Kingdom: Harvester Press.
Fisher, S., & Greenberg, R. P. (1996). Freud scientiﬁcally reappraised. Testing the theories and therapy .
New York, NY: Wiley.
Fiss, H. (1995). The post-Freudian dream. A reconsideration of dream theory based on recent sleep
laboratory ﬁndings. In H. Bareuther, K. Brede, M. Evert-Saleh, N. Spangenberg (Eds.), Traum und
Gedächtnis. Materialien aus dem Sigmund-Freud-Institut (Bd. 15; pp. 11–35). Münster, Germany:
Lit.
Fonagy, P., Kächele, H., Leuzinger-Bohleber, M., & Taylor, D. (2012). The signiﬁcance of dreams.
Bridging clinical and extraclinical research in psychoanalysis . London, United Kingdom: Karnac.
Fosshage, J. L. (1987). New vistas on dream interpretation. In M. Glucksman (Ed.), Dreams in new
perspective: The royal road revisited (pp. 111–128). New York, NY: Uman Sciences Press.This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.320 ROESLER

Fosshage, J. L. (1997). The organizing functions of dreaming mentation. Contemporary Psychoanalysis,
33,429–458. http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/00107530.1997.10746997
Freud, S. (1900). The interpretation of dreams . Standard edition, IV and V. London, United Kingdom:
Hogarth.
Greenberg, R., & Pearlman, C. (1978). If Freud only knew. A reconsideration of psychoanalytic dream
theory. International Review of Psycho-Analysis, 5, 71–75.
Gülich, E., & Quasthoff, U. (1985). Narrative analysis. In T. A. van Dijk (Ed.), Handbook of discourse
analysis, Vol. II :Dimensions of discourse (pp. 169–197). London, United Kingdom: Academic
Press.
Hall, C. S., & Nordby, V. J. (1972). The individual and his dreams . New York, NY: New American
Library.
Hall, C. S., & Van De Castle, R. L. (1966). The content analysis of dreams . New York, NY:
Appleton-Century-Crofts.
Hill, C. E. (1996). Working with dreams in psychotherapy . New York, NY: Guilford Press.
Hobson, J. A., & Schredl, M. (2011). The continuity and discontinuity between waking and dreaming:
A dialogue between Michael Schredl and Allan Hobson concerning the adequacy and completenessof these notions. International Journal of Dream Research, 4, 3–7.
Hoss, R. J. (2011). The continuity and discontinuity between waking and dreaming from the perspective
of an analytical psychological construct. International Journal of Dream Research, 4, 81–83.
Jung, C. G. (1971). Allgemeine Gesichtspunkte zur Psychologie des Traumes . Olten, Switzerland: Walter.
Jung, C. G. (1981). Die Archetypen und das Kollektive Unbewusste . Olten, Switzerland: Walter.
Levin, R. (1990). Psychoanalytic theories on the function of dreaming. A review of the empirical dream
research. In J. M. Masling (Ed.), Empirical studies of psychoanalytic theories (pp. 87–103). Hillsdale,
NJ: Erlbaum.
Moser, U., & von Zeppelin, I. (Eds.). (1991). Cognitive-affective processes . New York, NY: Springer.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/978-3-642-84499-7
Palombo, S. R. (1982). How the dream works. The role of dreaming in the psychotherapeutic process.
In S. Slipp (Ed.), Curative factors in dynamic psychotherapy (pp. 223–242). New York, NY:
McGraw-Hill.
Popp, C., Luborsky, L., & Crits-Christoph, P. (1990). The parallel of the CCRT from therapy narratives
with the CCRT from dreams. In L. Luborsky & P. Crits-Christoph (Eds.), Understanding
transference. The CCRT method (pp. 158–172). New York, NY: Basic Books.
Propp, V. (1975). Morphologie des Märchens . Frankfurt, Germany: Surkamp.
Roesler, C. (in press). Structural dream analysis: A narrative methodology for investigating the meaning
of dream series and their development in the course of psychotherapy. In G. Lucius-Hoene, C.Holmberg, & T. Meyer (Eds.), Illness narratives in practice . United Kingdom: Oxford University
Press.
Sándor, P., Szakadát, S., & Bódizs, R. (2016). The development of cognitive and emotional processing
as reﬂected in children’s dreams: Active self in an eventful dream signals better neuropsychologicalskills. Dreaming, 26, 58–78. http://dx.doi.org/10.1037/drm0000022
Schredl, M. (2008). Personality correlates of ﬂying dreams. Imagination, Cognition and Personality, 27,
129–137. http://dx.doi.org/10.2190/IC.27.2.d
Stevens, A. (1995). Private myths: Dreams and dreaming . London, United Kingdom: Hamish Hamilton.
Tanaka, Y. (2014). What is born in analytical practice for patients with the problem of “unborn-ness”?
Presentation at the Journal of Analytical Psychology XIIth International Conference, Berlin,
Germany, May 30, 2014.
Werner, C., & Langenmayr, A. (2005). Der Traum und die Fehlleistungen. Psychoanalyse und Empirie
(Vol. 2). Göttingen, Germany: Vandenhoeck und Ruprecht.This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.TYPOLOGY OF DREAM PATTERNS IN DREAM SERIES 321

